Preface
In The Doors of Perception Aldous Huxley has given us a superbly written account of the
effects of mescalin upon a highly sensitive person. It was a record of his first experience of
this remarkable transformation of consciousness, and by now, through subsequent
experiments, he knows that it can lead to far deeper insights than his book described. While
I cannot hope to surpass Aldous Huxley as a master of English prose, I feel that the time is
ripe for an account of some of the deeper, or higher, levels of insight that can be reached
through these consciousness-changing "drugs" when accompanied with sustained
philosophical reflection by a person who is in search, not of kicks, but of understanding. I
should perhaps add that, for me, philosophical reflection is barren when divorced from
poetic imagination, for we proceed to understanding of the world upon two legs, not one.
It is now a commonplace that there is a serious lack of communication between scientists
and laymen on the theoretical level, for the layman does not understand the mathematical
language in which the scientist thinks. For example, the concept of curved space cannot be
represented in any image that is intelligible to the senses. But I am still more concerned
with the gap between theoretical description and direct experience among scientists
themselves. Western science is now delineating a new concept of man, not as a solitary ego
within a wall of flesh, but as an organism which is what it is by virtue of its inseparability
from the rest of the world. But with the rarest exceptions even scientists do not feel
themselves to exist in this way. They, and almost all of us, retain a sense of personality
which is independent, isolated, insular, and estranged from the cosmos that surrounds it.
Somehow this gap must be closed, and among the varied means whereby the closure may
be initiated or achieved are medicines which science itself has discovered, and which may
prove to be the sacraments of its religion.
For a long time we have been accustomed to the compartmentalization of religion and
science as if they were two quite different and basically unrelated ways of seeing the world.
I do not believe that this state of doublethink can last. It must eventually be replaced by a
view of the world which is neither religious nor scientific but simply our view of the world.
More exactly, it must become a view of the world in which the reports of science and
religion are as concordant as those of the eyes and the ears.
But the traditional roads to spiritual experience seldom appeal to persons of scientific or
skeptical temperament, for the vehicles that ply them are rickety and piled with excess
baggage. There is thus little opportunity for the alert and critical thinker to share at first
hand in the modes of consciousness that seers and mystics are trying to express—often in
archaic and awkward symbolism. If the pharmacologist can be of help in exploring this
unknown world, he may be doing us the extraordinary service of rescuing religious
experience from the obscurantists,
To make this book as complete an expression as possible of the quality of consciousness
which these drugs induce, I have included a number of photographs which, in their vivid
reflection of the patterns of nature, give some suggestion of the rhythmic beauty of detail
which the drugs reveal in common things. For without losing their normal breadth of vision
the eyes seen to become a microscope through which the mind delves deeper and deeper
into the intricately dancing texture of our world.
Alan W. Watts
San Francisco, 1962
Prologue
Slowly it becomes clear that one of the greatest of all superstitions is the separation of the
mind from the body. This does not mean that we are being forced to admit that we are only
bodies; it means that we are forming an altogether new idea of the body. For the body
considered as separate from the mind is one thing—an animated corpse. But the body
considered as inseparable from the mind is another, and as yet we have no proper word for
a reality which is simultaneously mental and physical. To call it mental-physical will not do
at all, for this is the very unsatisfactory joining of two concepts which have both been
impoverished by long separation and opposition. But we are at least within sight of being
able to discard altogether ideas of a stuff which is mental and a stuff which is material.
"Stuff" is a word which describes the formless mush that we perceive when sense is not
keen enough to make out its pattern. The notion of material or mental stuff is based on the
false analogy that trees are made of wood, mountains of stone, and minds of spirit in the
same way that pots are made of clay. "Inert" matter seems to require an external and
intelligent energy to give it form. But now we know that matter is not inert. Whether it is
organic or inorganic, we are learning to see matter as patterns of energy—not of energy as
if energy were a stuff, but as energetic pattern, moving order, active intelligence.
The realization that mind and body, form and matter, are one is blocked, however, by ages
of semantic confusion and psychological prejudice. For it is common sense that every
pattern, shape, or structure is a form of something as pots are forms of clay. It is hard to
see that this "something" is as dispensable as the ether in which light was once supposed to
travel, or as the fabulous tortoise upon which the earth was once thought to be supported.
Anyone who can really grasp this point will experience a curiously exhilarating liberation, for
the burden of stuff will drop from him and he will walk less heavily.
The dualism of mind and body arose, perhaps, as a clumsy way of describing the power of
an intelligent organism to control itself. It seemed reasonable to think of the part controlled
as one thing and the part controlling as another. In this way the conscious will was opposed
to the involuntary appetites and reason to instinct. In due course we learned to center our
identity, our selfhood, in the controlling part—the mind—and increasingly to disown as a
mere vehicle the part controlled. It thus escaped our attention that the organism as a
whole, largely unconscious, was using consciousness and reason to inform and control itself.
We thought of our conscious intelligence as descending from a higher realm to take
possession of a physical vehicle. We therefore failed to see it as an operation of the same
formative process as the structure of nerves, muscles, veins, and bones—a structure so
subtly ordered (that is, intelligent) that conscious thought is as yet far from being able to
describe it.
This radical separation of the part controlling from the part controlled changed man from a
self-controlling to a self-frustrating organism, to the embodied conflict and self-contradiction
that he has been throughout his known history. Once the split occurred conscious
intelligence began to serve its own ends instead of those of the organism that produced it.
More exactly, it became the intention of the conscious intelligence to work for its own,
dissociated, purposes. But, as we shall see, just as the separation of mind from body is an
illusion, so also is the subjection of the body to the independent schemes of the mind.
Meanwhile, however, the illusion is as real as the hallucinations of hypnosis, and the
organism of man is indeed frustrating itself by patterns of behavior which move in the most
complex vicious circles. The culmination is a culture which ever more serves the ends of
mechanical order as distinct from those of organic enjoyment, and which is bent on selfdestruction against the instinct of every one of its members.
We believe, then, that the mind controls the body, not that the body controls itself through
the mind. Hence the ingrained prejudice that the mind should be independent of all physical
aids to its working—despite microscopes, telescopes, cameras, scales, computers, books,
works of art, alphabets, and all those physical tools apart from which it is doubtful whether
there would be any mental life at all. At the same time there has always been at least an
obscure awareness that in feeling oneself to be a separate mind, soul, or ego there is
something wrong. Naturally, for a person who finds his identity in something other than his
full organism is less than half a man. He is cut off from complete participation in nature,
Instead of being a body he "has" a body. Instead of living and loving he "has" instincts for
survival and copulation. Disowned, they drive him as if they were blind furies or demons
that possessed him.
The feeling that there is something wrong in all this revolves around a contradiction
characteristic of all civilizations. This is the simultaneous compulsion to preserve oneself and
to forget oneself. Here is the vicious circle; if you feel separate from your organic life, you
feel driven to survive; survival—going on living—thus becomes a duty and also a drag
because you are not fully with it; because it does not quite come up to expectations, you
continue to hope that it will, to crave for more time, to feel driven all the more to go on.
What we call self-consciousness is thus the sensation of the organism obstructing itself, of
not being with itself, of driving, so to say, with accelerator and brake on at once. Naturally,
this is a highly unpleasant sensation, which most people want to forget.
The lowbrow way of forgetting oneself is to get drunk, to be diverted with entertainments,
or to exploit such natural means of self-transcendence as sexual intercourse. The highbrow
way is to throw oneself into the pursuit of the arts, of social service, or of religious
mysticism. These measures are rarely successful because they do not disclose the basic
error of the split self. The highbrow ways even aggravate the error to the extent that those
who follow them take pride in forgetting themselves by purely mental means—even though
the artist uses paints or sounds, the social idealist distributes material wealth, and the
religionist uses sacraments and rituals, or such other physical means as fasting, yoga
breathing, or dervish dancing. And there is a sound instinct in the use of these physical
aids, as in the repeated insistence of mystics that to know about God is not enough:
transformation of the self is only through realizing or feeling God. The hidden point is that
man cannot function properly through changing anything so superficial as the order of his
thoughts, of his dissociated mind. What has to change is the behavior of his organism; it
has to become self-controlling instead of self-frustrating.
How is this to be brought about? Clearly, nothing can be done by the mind, by the conscious
will, so long as this is felt to be something apart from the total organism. But if it were felt
otherwise, nothing would need to be done! A very small number of Eastern gurus, or
masters of wisdom, and Western psychotherapists have found—rather laborious—ways of
tricking or coaxing the organism into integrating itself—mostly by a kind of judo, or "gentle
way," which overthrows the process of self-frustration by carrying it to logical and absurd
extremes. This is pre-eminently the way of Zen, and occasionally that of psychoanalysis.
When these ways work it is quite obvious that something more has happened to the student
or patient than a change in his way of thinking; he is also emotionally and physically
different; his whole being is operating in a new way.
For a long time it has been clear to me that certain forms of Eastern "mysticism"—in
particular Taoism and Zen Buddhism—do not presuppose a universe divided into the
spiritual and the material, and do not culminate in a state of consciousness where the
physical world vanishes into some undifferentiated and bodiless luminescence. Taoism and
Zen are alike founded upon a philosophy of relativity, but this philosophy is not merely
speculative. It is a discipline in awareness as a result of which the mutual interrelation of all
things and all events becomes a constant sensation. This sensation underlies and supports
our normal awareness of the world as a collection of separate and different things—an
awareness which, by itself, is called avidya (ignorance) in Buddhist philosophy because, in
paying exclusive attention to differences, it ignores relationships. It does not see, for
example, that mind and form or shape and space are as inseparable as front and back, nor
that the individual is so interwoven with the universe that he and it are one body.
This is a point of view which, unlike some other forms of mysticism, does not deny physical
distinctions but sees them as the plain expression of unity. As one sees so clearly in Chinese
painting, the individual tree or rock is not on but with the space that forms its background.
The paper untouched by the brush is an integral part of the picture and never mere backing.
It is for this reason that when a Zen master is asked about the universal or the ultimate, he
replies with the immediate and particular—The cypress tree in the yard!" Here, then, we
have what Robert Linssen has called a spiritual materialism—a standpoint far closer to
relativity and field theory in modem science than to any religious supenaturalism. But
whereas the scientific comprehension of the relative universe is as yet largely theoretical,
these Eastern disciplines have made it a direct experience. Potentially, then, they would
seem to offer a marvelous parallel to Western science, but on the level of our immediate
awareness of the world.
For science pursues the common-sense assumption that the natural world is a multiplicity of
individual things and events by attempting to describe these units as accurately and
minutely as possible. Because science is above all analytic in its way of describing things, it
seems at first to disconnect them more than ever. Its experiments are the study of carefully
isolated situations, designed to exclude influences that cannot be measured and controlled—
as when one studies falling bodies in a vacuum to cut out the friction of air. But for this
reason the scientist understands better than anyone else just how inseparable things are.
The more he tries to cut out external influences upon an experimental situation, the more
he discovers new ones, hitherto unsuspected. The more carefully he describes, say, the
motion of a given particle, the more he finds himself describing also the space in which it
moves. The realization that all things are inseparably related is in proportion to one's effort
to make them clearly distinct. Science therefore surpasses the common-sense point of view
from which it begins, coming to speak of things and events as properties of the "fields" in
which they occur. But this is simply a theoretical description of a state of affairs which, in
these forms of Eastern "mysticism," is directly sensed. As soon as this is clear, we have a
sound basis for a meeting of minds between East and West which could be remarkably
fruitful.
The practical difficulty is that Taoism and Zen are so involved with the forms of Far Eastern
culture that it is a major problem to adapt them to Western needs. For example, Eastern
teachers work on the esoteric and aristocratic principle that the student must learn the hard
way and find out almost everything for himself. Aside from occasional hints, the teacher
merely accepts or rejects the student's attainments, But Western teachers work on the
exoteric and democratic principle that everything possible must be done to inform and assist
the student so as to make his mastery of the subject as easy as possible. Does the latter
approach, as purists insist, merely vulgarize the discipline? The answer is that it depends
upon the type of discipline. If everyone learns enough mathematics to master quadratic
equations, the attainment will seem small in comparison with the much rarer
comprehension of the theory of numbers. But the transformation of consciousness
undertaken in Taoism and Zen is more like the correction of faulty perception or the curing
of a disease. It is not an acquisitive process of learning more and more facts or greater and
greater skills, but rather an unlearning of wrong habits and opinions. As Lao-tzu said, "The
scholar gains every day, but the Taoist loses every day."
The practice of Taoism or Zen in the Far East is therefore an undertaking in which the
Westerner will find himself confronted with many barriers erected quite deliberately to
discourage idle curiosity or to nullify wrong views by inciting the student to proceed
systematically and consistently upon false assumptions to the reductio ad absurdum. My
own main interest in the study of comparative mysticism has been to cut through these
tangles and to identify the essential psychological processes underlying those alterations of
perception which enable us to see ourselves and the world in their basic unity. I have
perhaps had some small measure of success in trying, Western fashion, to make this type of
experience more accessible. I am therefore at once gratified and embarrassed by a
development in Western science which could possibly put this unitive vision of the world, by
almost shockingly easy means, within the reach of many who have thus far sought it in vain
by traditional methods.
Part of the genius of Western science is that it finds simpler and more rational ways of doing
things that were formerly chancy or laborious. Like any inventive process, it does not
always make these discoveries systematically; often it just stumbles upon them, but then
goes on to work them into an intelligible order. In medicine, for example, science isolates
the essential drug from the former witch-doctor's brew of salamanders, mug-wort,
powdered skulls, and dried blood. The purified drug cures more surely, but—it does not
perpetuate health. The patient still has to change habits of life or diet which made him
prone to the disease.
Is it possible, then, that Western science could provide a medicine which would at least give
the human organism a start in releasing itself from its chronic self-contradiction? The
medicine might indeed have to be supported by other procedures—psychotherapy,
"spiritual" disciplines, and basic changes in one's pattern of life—but every diseased person
seems to need some kind of initial lift to set him on the way to health. The question is by no
means absurd if it is true that what afflicts us is a sickness not just of the mind but of the
organism, of the very functioning of the nervous system and the brain. Is there, in short, a
medicine which can give us temporarily the sensation of being integrated, of being fully one
with ourselves and with nature as the biologist knows us, theoretically, to be? If so, the
experience might offer clues to whatever else must be done to bring about full and
continuous integration. It might be at least the tip of an Ariadne's thread to lead us out of
the maze in which all of us are lost from our infancy.
Relatively recent research suggests that there are at least three such medicines, though
none is an infallible "specific." They work with some people, and much depends upon the
social and psychological context in which they are given. Occasionally their effects may be
harmful, but such limitations do not deter us from using penicillin—often a far more
dangerous chemical than any of these three. I am speaking, of course, of mescalin (the
active ingredient of the peyote cactus), lysergic acid diethyl-amide (a modified ergot
alkaloid), and psilocybin (a derivative of the mushroom psilocybe mexicana).
The peyote cactus has long been used by the Indians of the Southwest and Mexico as a
means of communion with the divine world, and today the eating of the dried buttons of the
plant is the principal sacrament of an Indian church known as the Native American Church
of the United States—by all accounts a most respectable and Christian organization. At the
end of the nineteenth century its effects were first described by Weir Mitchell and Havelock
Ellis, and some years later its active ingredient was identified as mescalin, a chemical of the
amine group which is quite easily synthesized.
Lysergic acid diethylamide was first discovered in 1938 by the Swiss pharmacologist A.
Hofman in the course of studying the properties of the ergot fungus. Quite by accident he
absorbed a small amount of this acid while making certain changes in its molecular
structure, and noticed its peculiar psychological effects. Further research proved that he had
hit upon the most powerful consciousness-changing drug now known, for LSD-25 (as it is
called for short) will produce its characteristic results in so minute a dosage as 20
micrograms, 1/700,000,000 of an average man's weight.
Psilocybin is derived from another of the sacred plants of the Mexican Indians—a type of
mushroom known to them as teonanacati, "the flesh of God." Following Robert Weitlaner's
discovery in 1936 that the cult of "the sacred mushroom" was still prevalent in Oaxaca, a
number of mycologists, as specialists in mushrooms are known, began to make studies of
the mushrooms of this region. Three varieties were found to be in use. In addition to
psilocybe mexicana there were also psilocybe aztecorum Heim and psilocybe Wassonii,
named respectively after the mycologists Roger Heim and Gordon and Valentina Wasson,
who took part in the ceremonies of the cult.
Despite a very considerable amount of research and speculation, little is known of the exact
physiological effect of these chemicals upon the nervous system. The subjective effects of
all three tend to be rather similar, though LSD-25, perhaps because of the minute dosage
required, seldom produces the nauseous reactions so often associated with the other two.
All the scientific papers I have read seem to add up to the vague impression that in some
way these drugs suspend certain inhibitory or selective processes in the nervous system so
as to render our sensory apparatus more open to impressions than is usual. Our ignorance
of the precise effect of these drugs is, of course, linked to the still rather fumbling state of
our knowledge of the brain. Such ignorance obviously suggests great caution in their use,
but thus far there is no evidence that, in normal dosage, there is any likelihood of
physiological damage.*
* Normal dosage for mescalin is 300 milligrams, for LSD-25 100 micrograms, and for psilocybin 20 milligrams. The
general reader interested in a more detailed account of consciousness-changing drugs and the present state of
research concerning them should consult Robert S. de Ropp's Drugs and the Mind (Grove Press, New York, 1960).
In a very wide sense of the word, each of these substances is a drug, but one must avoid
the serious semantic error of confusing them with drugs which induce physical craving for
repeated use or which dull the senses like alcohol or the sedatives. They are classed,
officially, as hallucinogens—an astonishingly inaccurate term, since they cause one neither
to hear voices nor to see visions such as might be confused with physical reality. While they
do indeed produce the most complex and very obviously "hallucinatory" patterns before
closed eyes, their general effect is to sharpen the senses to a supernormal degree of
awareness. The standard dosage of each substance maintains its effects for from five to
eight hours, and the experience is often so deeply revealing and moving that one hesitates
to approach it again until it has been thoroughly "digested," and this may be a matter of
months.
The reaction of most cultured people to the idea of gaining any deep psychological or
philosophical insight through a drug is that it is much too simple, too artificial, and even too
banal to be seriously considered. A wisdom which can be "turned on" like the switch of a
lamp seems to insult human dignity and degrade us to chemical automata. One calls to
mind pictures of a brave new world in which there is a class of synthesized Buddhas, of
people who have been "fixed" like the lobotomized, the sterilized, or the hypnotized, only in
another direction—people who have somehow lost their humanity and with whom, as with
drunkards, one cannot really communicate. This is, however, a somewhat ghoulish fantasy
which has no relation to the facts or to the experience itself. It belongs to the same kind of
superstitious dread which one feels for the unfamiliar, confusing it with the unnatural—the
way some people feel about Jews because they are circumcised or even about Negroes
because of their "alien" features and color.
Despite the widespread and undiscriminating prejudice against drugs as such, and despite
the claims of certain religious disciplines to be the sole means to genuine mystical insight, I
can find no essential difference between the experiences induced, under favorable
conditions, by these chemicals and the states of "cosmic consciousness" recorded by R. M.
Bucke, William James, Evelyn Under bill, Raynor Johnson, and other investigators of
mysticism, "Favorable conditions" means a setting which is socially and physically
congenial; ideally this would be some sort of retreat house (not a hospital or sanitarium)
supervised by religiously oriented psychiatrists or psychologists, The atmosphere should be
homelike rather than clinical, and it is of the utmost importance that the supervisor's
attitude be supportive and sympathetic. Under insecure, bizarre, or unfriendly
circumstances the experience can easily degenerate into a highly unpleasant paranoia. Two
days should be set aside—one for the experience itself, which lasts for six or eight hours,
and one for evaluation in the calm and relaxed frame of mind that normally follows.
This is simply to say that the use of such powerful medicines is not to be taken lightly, as
one smokes a cigarette or tosses down a cocktail. They should be approached as one
approaches a sacrament, though not with the peculiar inhibition of gaiety and humor that
has become customary in our religious rituals. It is a sound general rule that there should
always be present some qualified supervisor to provide a point of contact with "reality" as it
is socially defined. Ideally the "qualified supervisor" should be a psychiatrist or clinical
psychologist who has himself experienced the effects of the drug, though I have observed
that many who are technically qualified have a frightened awe of unusual states of
consciousness which is apt to communicate itself, to the detriment of the experience, to
those under their care. The most essential qualification of the supervisor is, therefore,
confidence in the situation—which is likewise "picked up" by people in the state of acute
sensitivity that the drugs induce.
The drugs in question are not aphrodisiacs, and when they are taken in common by a small
group the atmosphere is not in the least suggestive of a drunken brawl nor of the communal
torpor of an opium den. Members of the group usually become open to each other with a
high degree of friendly affection, for in the mystical phase of the experience the underlying
unity or "belongingness" of the members can have all the clarity of a physical sensation.
Indeed the social situation may become what religious bodies aim at, but all too rarely
achieve, in their rites of communion—a relationship of the most vivid understanding,
forgiveness, and love. Of course, this does not automatically become a permanent feeling,
but neither does the sense of fellowship sometimes evoked in strictly religious gatherings.
The experience corresponds almost exactly to the theological concept of a sacrament or
means of grace—an unmerited gift of spiritual power whose lasting effects depend upon the
use made of it in subsequent action. Catholic theology also recognizes those so-called
"extraordinary" graces, often of mystical insight, which descend spontaneously outside the
ordinary or regular means that the Church provides through the sacraments and the
disciplines of prayer. It seems to me that only special pleading can maintain that the graces
mediated through mushrooms, cactus plants, and scientists are artificial and spurious in
contrast with those which come through religious discipline. Claims for the exclusive virtue
of one's own brand is, alas, as common in organized religion as in commerce, coupled in the
former instance with the puritan's sense of guilt in enjoying anything for which he has not
suffered.
The grounds for any possible suppression of these medicines are almost entirely
superstitious. There is no evidence for their being as deleterious as alcohol or tobacco, nor,
indeed, for their being harmful in any way except when used in improper circumstances or,
perhaps, with psychotic subjects.* They are considerably less dangerous than many of the
ordinary contents of the family medicine cupboard or kitchen closet. As instruments of
power and inquiry they do not even begin to be as risky as X-rays, and as threats to mental
health they can hardly match the daily drivel assailing our thoughts through radio,
television, and the newspaper. Any public alarm about the widening use of these drugs
seems to be due, on the one hand, to their association with the beat generation and the
hipster world, and, on the other, to embarrassment at the fact that anything genuinely
spiritual can come out of a bottle. The latter cause is part of the superstition that human
nature is degraded in the admission that men are, after all, physical organisms and that
what they are has a great deal to do with what they eat. Furthermore, speaking quite
strictly, mystical insight is no more in the chemical itself than biological knowledge is in the
microscope.
There is no difference in principle between sharpening perception with an external
instrument, such as a microscope, and sharpening it with an internal instrument, such as
one of these three drugs. If they are an affront to the dignity of the mind, the microscope is
an affront to the dignity of the eye and the telephone to the dignity of the ear. Strictly
speaking, these drugs do not impart wisdom at all, any more than the microscope alone
gives knowledge. They provide the raw materials of wisdom, and are useful to the extent
that the individual can integrate what they reveal into the whole pattern of his behavior and
the whole system of his knowledge. As an escape, an isolated and dissociated ecstasy, they
may have the same sort of value as a rest cure or a good entertainment. But this is like
using a giant computer to play tick-tack-toe, and the hours of heightened perception are
wasted unless occupied with sustained reflection or meditation upon whatever themes may
be suggested.
* Anything—even a glass of beer or a walk upstairs—may be dangerous to a person in poor health. Naturally, such
contingencies are quite beyond the bounds of this discussion.
The nearest thing I know in literature to the reflective use of one of these drugs is the socalled Bead Game in Hermann Hesse's Magister Ludi (Das Glasperlenspiel). Hesse writes of
a distant future in which an order of scholar-mystics have discovered an ideographic
language which can relate all the branches of science and art, philosophy and religion. The
game consists in playing with the relationships between configurations in these various
fields in the same way that the musician plays with harmonic and contrapuntal
relationships. From such elements as the design of a Chinese house, a Scarlatti sonata, a
topological formula, and a verse from the Upanishads, the players will elucidate a common
theme and develop its application in numerous directions. No two games are the same, for
not only do the elements differ, but also there is no thought of attempting to force a static
and uniform order upon the world. The universal language facilitates the perception of
relationships but does not fix them, and is founded upon a "musical" conception of the world
in which order is as dynamic and changing as the patterns of sound in a fugue.
Similarly, in using lysergic acid or psilocybin, I usually start with some such theme as
polarity, transformation (as of food into organism), competition for survival, the relation of
the abstract to the concrete, or of Logos to Eros, and then allow my heightened perception
to elucidate the theme in terms of certain works of art or music, of some such natural object
as a fern, a flower, or a sea shell, of a religious or mythological archetype (it might be the
Mass), and even of personal relationships with those who happen to be with me at the time.
Or I may concentrate upon one of the senses and try, as it were, to turn it back upon itself
so as to see the process of seeing, and from this move on to trying to know knowing, so
approaching the problem of my own identity.
From these reflections there arise intuitive insights of astonishing clarity, and because there
is little difficulty in remembering them after the effects of the drug have ceased (especially
if they are recorded or written down at the time), the days or weeks following may be used
for testing them by the normal standards of logical, aesthetic, philosophical, or scientific
criticism. As might be expected, some prove to be valid and others not. It is the same with
the sudden hunches that come to the artist or inventor in the ordinary way; they are not
always as true or as applicable as they seem to be in the moment of illumination. The drugs
appear to give an enormous impetus to the creative intuition, and thus to be of more value
for constructive invention and research than for psychotherapy in the ordinary sense of
"adjusting" the disturbed personality. Their best sphere of use is not the mental hospital but
the studio and the laboratory, or the institute of advanced studies.
The following pages make no attempt to be a scientific report on the effects of these
chemicals, with the usual details of dosage, time and place, physical symptoms, and the
like. Such documents exist by the thousand, and, in view of our very rudimentary
knowledge of the brain, seem to me to have a rather limited value. As well try to
understand a book by dissolving it in solution and popping it into a centrifuge. My object is
rather to give some impression of the new world of consciousness which these substances
reveal. I do not believe that this world is either a hallucination or an unimpeachable
revelation of truth. It is probably the way things appear when certain inhibitory processes of
the brain and senses are suspended, but this is a world in some ways so unfamiliar that it is
liable to misinterpretation. Our first impressions may be as wide of the mark as those of the
traveler in an unfamiliar country or of astronomers taking their first look at the galaxies
beyond our own.
I have written this account as if the whole experience had happened on one day in a single
place, but it is in fact a composite of several occasions. Except where I am describing
visions before closed eyes, and this is always specified, none of these experiences are
hallucinations. They are simply changed ways of seeing, interpreting, and reacting to actual
persons and events in the world of "public reality," which, for purposes of this description, is
a country estate on the West Coast with garden, orchard, barns, and surrounding
mountains—all just as described, including the rattletrap car loaded with junk.
Consciousness-changing drugs are popularly associated with the evocation of bizarre and
fantastic images, but in my own experience this happens only with closed eyes. Otherwise,
it is simply that the natural world is endowed with a richness of grace, color, significance,
and, sometimes, humor, for which our normal adjectives are insufficient. The speed of
thought and association is increased so astonishingly that it is hard for words to keep pace
with the flood of ideas that come to mind. Passages that may strike the reader as ordinary
philosophical reflection are reports of what, at the time, appear to be the most tangible
certainties. So, too, images that appear before closed eyes are not just figments of
imagination, but patterns and scenes so intense and autonomous that they seem to be
physically present. The latter have, however, proved of less interest to me than one's
transformed impression of the natural world and the heightened speed of associative
thought, and it is thus with these that the following account is chiefly concerned.
The Joyous Cosmology
To begin with, this world has a different kind of time. It is the time of biological rhythm, not
of the clock and all that goes with the clock. There is no hurry. Our sense of time is
notoriously subjective and thus dependent upon the quality of our attention, whether of
interest or boredom, and upon the alignment of our behavior in terms of routines, goals,
and deadlines. Here the present is self-sufficient, but it is not a static present. It is a
dancing present—the unfolding of a pattern which has no specific destination in the future
but is simply its own point. It leaves and arrives simultaneously, and the seed is as much
the goal as the flower. There is therefore time to perceive every detail of the movement
with infinitely greater richness of articulation. Normally we do not so much look at things as
overlook them. The eye sees types and classes—flower, leaf, rock, bird, fire—mental
pictures of things rather than things, rough outlines filled with flat color, always a little
dusty and dim.
But here the depth of light and structure in a bursting bud go on forever, There is time to
see them, time for the whole intricacy of veins and capillaries to develop in consciousness,
time to see down and down into the shape of greenness, which is not green at all, but a
whole spectrum generalizing itself as green—purple, gold, the sunlit turquoise of the ocean,
the intense luminescence of the emerald. I cannot decide where shape ends and color
begins. The bud has opened and the fresh leaves fan out and curve back with a gesture
which is unmistakably communicative but does not say anything except, "Thus!" And
somehow that is quite satisfactory, even startlingly clear. The meaning is transparent in the
same way that the color and the texture are transparent, with light which does not seem to
fall upon surfaces from above but to be right inside the structure and color. Which is of
course where it is, for light is an inseparable trinity of sun, object, and eye, and the
chemistry of the leaf is its color, its light.
But at the same time color and light are the gift of the eye to the leaf and the sun.
Transparency is the property of the eyeball, projected outward as luminous space,
interpreting quanta of energy in terms of the gelatinous fibers in the head. I begin to feel
that the world is at once inside my head and outside it, and the two, inside and outside,
begin to include or "cap" one another like an infinite series of concentric spheres. I am
unusually aware that everything I am sensing is also my body—that light, color, shape,
sound, and texture are terms and properties of the brain conferred upon the outside world. I
am not looking at the world, not confronting it; I am knowing it by a continuous process of
transforming it into myself, so that everything around me, the whole globe of space, no
longer feels away from me but in the middle.
This is at first confusing. I am not quite sure of the direction from which sounds come. The
visual space seems to reverberate with them as if it were a drum. The surrounding hills
rumble with the sound of a truck, and the rumble and the color-shape of the hills become
one and the same gesture. I use that word deliberately and shall use it again. The hills are
moving into their stillness. They mean something because they are being transformed into
my brain, and my brain is an organ of meaning. The forests of redwood trees upon them
look like green fire, and the copper-gold of the sun-dried grass heaves immensely into the
sky. Time is so slow as to be a kind of eternity, and the flavor of eternity transfers itself to
the hills—burnished mountains which I seem to remember from an immeasurably distant
past, at once so unfamiliar as to be exotic and yet as familiar as my own hand. Thus
transformed into consciousness, into the electric, interior luminosity of the nerves, the world
seems vaguely insubstantial—developed upon a color film, resounding upon the skin of a
drum, pressing, not with weight, but with vibrations interpreted as weight. Solidity is a
neurological invention, and, I wonder, can the nerves be solid to themselves? Where do we
begin? Does the order of the brain create the order of the world, or the order of the world
the brain? The two seem like egg and hen, or like back and front.
The physical world is vibration, quanta, but vibrations of what? To the eye, form and color;
to the ear, sound; to the nose, scent; to the fingers, touch. But these are all different
languages for the same thing, different qualities of sensitivity, different dimensions of
consciousness. The question, "Of what are they differing forms?" seems to have no
meaning. What is light to the eye is sound to the ear. I have the image of the senses being
terms, forms, or dimensions not of one thing common to all, but of each other, locked in a
circle of mutuality. Closely examined, shape becomes color, which becomes vibration, which
becomes sound, which becomes smell, which becomes taste, and then touch, and then
again shape. (One can see, for example, that the shape of a leaf is its color. There is no
outline around the leaf; the outline is the limit where one colored surface becomes another.)
I see all these sensory dimensions as a round dance, gesticulations of one pattern being
transformed into gesticulations of another. And these gesticulations are flowing through a
space that has still other dimensions, which I want to describe as tones of emotional color,
of light or sound being joyous or fearful, gold elated or lead depressed. These, too, form a
circle of reciprocity, a round spectrum so polarized that we can only describe each in terms
of the others.
Sometimes the image of the physical world is not so much a dance of gestures as a woven
texture. Light, sound, touch, taste, and smell become a continuous warp, with the feeling
that the whole dimension of sensation is a single continuum or field. Crossing the warp is a
woof representing the dimension of meaning—moral and aesthetic values, personal or
individual uniqueness, logical significance, and expressive form—and the two dimensions
interpenetrate so as to make distinguishable shapes seem like ripples in the water of
sensation. The warp and the woof stream together, for the weaving is neither flat nor static
but a many-directioned cross-flow of impulses filling the whole volume of space. I feel that
the world is on something in somewhat the same way that a color photograph is on a film,
underlying and connecting the patches of color, though the film here is a dense rain of
energy. I see that what it is on is my brain—"that enchanted loom," as Sherrington called it.
Brain and world, warp of sense and woof of meaning, seem to interpenetrate inseparably.
They hold their boundaries or limits in common in such a way as to define one another and
to be impossible without each other.
I am listening to the music of an organ. As leaves seemed to gesture, the organ seems
quite literally to speak. There is no use of the vox humana stop, but every sound seems to
issue from a vast human throat, moist with saliva. As, with the base pedals, the player
moves slowly down the scale, the sounds seem to blow forth in immense, gooey spludges.
As I listen more carefully, the spludges acquire texture—expanding circles of vibration finely
and evenly toothed like combs, no longer moist and liquidinous like the living throat, but
mechanically discontinuous. The sound disintegrates into the innumerable individual drrrits
of vibration. Listening on, the gaps close, or perhaps each individual drrrit becomes in its
turn a spludge. The liquid and the hard, the continuous and the discontinuous, the gooey
and the prickly, seem to be transformations of each other, or to be different levels of
magnification upon the same thing.
This theme recurs in a hundred different ways—the inseparable polarity of opposites, or the
mutuality and reciprocity of all the possible content g, of consciousness. It is easy to see
theoretically that all perception is of contrasts—figure and ground, light and shadow, clear
and vague, firm and weak. But normal attention seems to have difficulty in taking in both at
once. Both sensuously and conceptually we seem to move serially from one to the other; we
do not seem to be able to attend to the figure without relative unconsciousness of the
ground. But in this new world the mutuality of things is quite clear at every level. The
human face, for example, becomes clear in all its aspects—the total form together with each
single hair and wrinkle. Faces become all ages at once, for characteristics that suggest age
also suggest youth by implication; the bony structure suggesting the skull evokes instantly
the newborn infant. The associative couplings of the brain seem to fire simultaneously
instead of one at a time, projecting a view of life which may be terrifying in its ambiguity or
joyous in its integrity.
Decision can be completely paralyzed by the sudden realization that there is no way of
having good without evil, or that it is impossible to act upon reliable authority without
choosing, from your own inexperience, to do so. If sanity implies madness and faith doubt,
am I basically a psychotic pretending to be sane, a blithering terrified idiot who manages,
temporarily, to put on an act of being self-possessed? I begin to see my whole life as a
masterpiece of duplicity—the confused, helpless, hungry, and hideously sensitive little
embryo at the root of me having learned, step by step, to comply, placate, bully, wheedle,
natter, bluff, and cheat my way into being taken for a person of competence and reliability.
For when it really comes down to it, what do any of us know?
I am listening to a priest chanting the Mass and a choir of nuns responding. His mature,
cultivated voice rings with the serene authority of the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic
Church, of the Faith once and for all delivered to the saints, and the nuns respond, naively it
seems, with childlike, utterly innocent devotion. But, listening again, I can hear the priest
"putting on" his voice, hear the inflated, pompous balloon, the studiedly unctuous tones of a
master deceptionist who has the poor little nuns, kneeling in their stalls, completely cowed.
Listen deeper. The nuns are not cowed at all. They are playing possum. With just a little
stiffening, the limp gesture of bowing turns into the gesture of the closing claw. With too
few men to go around, the nuns know what is good for them: how to bend and survive.
But this profoundly cynical view of things is only an intermediate stage. I begin to
congratulate the priest on his gamesmanship, on the sheer courage of being able to put up
such a performance of authority when he knows precisely nothing. Perhaps there is no other
knowing than the mere competence of the act. If, at the heart of one's being, there is no
real self to which one ought to be true, sincerity is simply nerve; it lies in the unabashed
vigor of the pretense.
But pretense is only pretense when it is assumed that the act is not true to the agent. Find
the agent. In the priest's voice I hear down at the root the primordial howl of the beast in
the jungle, but it has been inflected, complicated, refined, and textured with centuries of
culture. Every new twist, every additional subtlety, was a fresh gambit in the game of
making the original howl more effective. At first, crude and unconcealed, the cry for food or
mate, or just noise for the fun of it, making the rocks echo. Then rhythm to enchant, then
changes of tone to plead or threaten. Then words to specify the need, to promise and
bargain. And then, much later, the gambits of indirection. The feminine stratagem of
stooping to conquer, the claim to superior worth in renouncing the world for the spirit, the
cunning of weakness proving stronger than the might of muscle—and the meek inheriting
the earth.
As I listen, then, I can hear in that one voice the simultaneous presence of all the levels of
man's history, as of all the stages of life before man. Every step in the game becomes as
clear as the rings in a severed tree. But this is an ascending hierarchy of maneuvers, of
stratagems capping stratagems, all symbolized in the overlays of refinement beneath which
the original howl is still sounding. Sometimes the howl shifts from the mating call of the
adult animal to the helpless crying of the baby, and I feel all man's music—its pomp and
circumstance, its gaiety, its awe, its confident solemnity—as just so much complication and
concealment of baby wailing for mother. And as I want to cry with pity, I know I am sorry
for myself. I, as an adult, am also back there alone in the dark, just as the primordial howl
is still present beneath the sublime modulations of the chant.
You poor baby! And yet—you selfish little bastard! As I try to find the agent behind the act,
the motivating force at the bottom of the whole thing, I seem to see only an endless
ambivalence. Behind the mask of love I find my innate selfishness. What a predicament I
am in if someone asks, "Do you really love me?" I can't say yes without saying no, for the
only answer that will really satisfy is, "Yes, I love you so much I could eat you! My love for
you is identical with my love for myself. I love you with the purest selfishness." No one
wants to be loved out of a sense of duty.
So I will be very frank. "Yes, I am pure, selfish desire and I love you because you make me
feel wonderful—at any rate for the time being." But then I begin to wonder whether there
isn't something a bit cunning in this frankness. It is big of me to be so sincere, to make a
play for her by not pretending to be more than I am—unlike the other guys who say they
love her for herself. I see that there is always something insincere about trying to be
sincere, as if I were to say openly, "The statement that I am now making is a lie." There
seems to be something phony about every attempt to define myself, to be totally honest.
The trouble is that I can't see the back, much less the inside, of my head. I can't be honest
because I don't fully know what I am. Consciousness peers out from a center which it
cannot see—and that is the root of the matter.
Life seems to resolve itself down to a tiny germ or nipple of sensitivity. I call it the EenieWeenie—a squiggling little nucleus that is trying to make love to itself and can never quite
get there. The whole fabulous complexity of vegetable and animal life, as of human
civilization, is just a colossal elaboration of the Eenie-Weenie trying to make the EenieWeenie. I am in love with myself, but cannot seek myself without hiding myself. As I pursue
my own tail, it runs away from me, Does the amoeba split itself in two in an attempt to
solve this problem?
I try to go deeper, sinking thought and feeling down and down to their ultimate beginnings.
What do I mean by loving myself? In what form do I know myself? Always, it seems, in the
form of something other, something strange; The landscape I am watching is also a state of
myself, of the neurons in my head. I feel the rock in my hand in terms of my own fingers.
And nothing is stranger than my own body—the sensation of the pulse, the eye seen
through a magnifying glass in the mirror, the shock of realizing that oneself is something in
the external world. At root, there is simply no way of separating self from other, self-love
from other-love. All knowledge of self is knowledge of other, and all knowledge of other
knowledge of self. I begin to see that self and other, the familiar and the strange, the
internal and the external, the predictable and the unpredictable imply each other. One is
seek and the other is hide, and the more I become aware of their implying each other, the
more I feel them to be one with each other. I become curiously affectionate and intimate
with all that seemed alien. In the features of everything foreign, threatening, terrifying,
incomprehensible, and remote I begin to recognize myself. Yet this is a "myself" which I
seem to be remembering from long, long ago—not at all my empirical ego of yesterday, not
my specious personality.
The "myself" which I am beginning to recognize, which I had forgotten but actually know
better than anything else, goes far back beyond my childhood, beyond the time when adults
confused me and tried to tell me that I was someone else; when, because they were bigger
and stronger, they could terrify me with their imaginary fears and bewilder and outface me
in the complicated game that I had not yet learned. (The sadism of the teacher explaining
the game and yet having to prove his superiority in it.) Long before all that, long before I
was an embryo in my mother's womb, there looms the ever-so-familiar stranger, the
everything not me, which I recognize, with a joy immeasurably more intense than a
meeting of lovers separated by centuries, to be my original self. The good old sonofabitch
who got me involved in this whole game,
At the same time everyone and everything around me takes on the feeling of having been
there always, and then forgotten, and then remembered again. We are sitting in a garden
surrounded in every direction by uncultivated hills, a garden of fuchsias and hummingbirds
in a valley that leads down to the westernmost ocean, and where the gulls take refuge in
storms. At some time in the middle of the twentieth century, upon an afternoon in the
summer, we are sitting around a table on the terrace, eating dark homemade bread and
drinking white wine. And yet we seem to have been there forever, for the people with me
are no longer the humdrum and harassed little personalities with names, addresses, and
social security numbers, the specifically dated mortals we are all pretending to be. They
appear rather as immortal archetypes of themselves without, however, losing their
humanity. It is just that their differing characters seem, like the priest's voice, to contain all
history; they are at once unique and eternal, men and women but also gods and goddesses.
For now that we have time to look at each other we become timeless. The human form
becomes immeasurably precious and, as if to symbolize this, the eyes become intelligent
jewels, the hair spun gold, and the flesh translucent ivory. Between those who enter this
world together there is also a love which is distinctly eucharistic, an acceptance of each
other's natures from the heights to the depths.
Ella, who planted the garden, is a beneficent Circe—sorceress, daughter of the moon,
familiar of cats and snakes, herbalist and healer—with the youngest old face one has ever
seen, exquisitely wrinkled, silver-black hair rippled like flames. Robert is a manifestation of
Pan, but a Pan of bulls instead of the Pan of goats, with frizzled short hair tufted into blunt
horns—a man all sweating muscle and body, incarnation of exuberant glee. Beryl, his wife,
is a nymph who has stepped out of the forest, a mermaid of the land with swinging hair and
a dancing body that seems to be naked even when clothed. It is her bread that we are
eating, and it tastes like the Original Bread of which mother's own bread was a bungled
imitation. And then there is Mary, beloved in the usual, dusty world, but in this world an
embodiment of light and gold, daughter of the sun, with eyes formed from the evening
sky—a creature of all ages, baby, moppet, maid, matron, crone, and corpse, evoking love of
all ages.
I try to find words that will suggest the numinous, mythological quality of these people. Yet
at the same time they are as familiar as if I had known them for centuries, or rather, as if I
were recognizing them again as lost friends whom I knew at the beginning of time, from a
country begotten before all worlds. This is of course bound up with the recognition of my
own most ancient identity, older by far than the blind squiggling of the Eenie-Weenie, as if
the highest form that consciousness could take had somehow been present at the very
beginning of things. All of us look at each other knowingly, for the feeling that we knew
each other in that most distant past conceals something else—tacit, awesome, almost
unmentionable—the realization that at the deep center of a time perpendicular to ordinary
time we are, and always have been, one. We acknowledge the marvelously hidden plot, the
master illusion, whereby we appear to be different.
The shock of recognition. In the form of everything most other, alien, and remote—the
ever-receding galaxies, the mystery of death, the terrors of disease and madness, the
foreign-feeling, gooseflesh world of sea monsters and spiders, the queasy labyrinth of my
own insides—in all these forms I have crept up on myself and yelled "Boo!" I scare myself
out of my wits, and, while out of my wits, cannot remember just how it happened.
Ordinarily I am lost in a maze. I don't know how I got here, for I have lost the thread and
forgotten the intricately convoluted system of passages through which the game of hideand-seek was pursued. (Was it the path I followed in growing the circuits of my brain?) But
now the principle of the maze is clear. It is the device of something turning back upon itself
so as to seem to be other, and the turns have been so many and so dizzyingly complex that
I am quite bewildered. The principle is that all dualities and opposites are not disjoined but
polar; they do not encounter and confront one another from afar; they exfoliate from a
common center. Ordinary thinking conceals polarity and relativity because it employs terms,
the terminals or ends, the poles, neglecting what lies between them. The difference of front
and back, to be and not to be, hides their unity and mutuality,
Now consciousness, sense perception, is always a sensation of contrasts. It is a
specialization in differences, in noticing, and nothing is definable, classifiable, or noticeable
except by contrast with something else. But man does not live by consciousness alone, for
the linear, step-by-step, contrast-by-contrast procedure of attention is quite inadequate for
organizing anything so complex as a living body. The body itself has an "omniscience" which
is unconscious, or superconscious, just because it deals with relation instead of contrast,
with harmonies rather than discords. It "thinks" or organizes as a plant grows, not as a
botanist describes its growth. This is why Shiva has ten arms, for he represents the dance
of life, the omnipotence of being able to do innumerably many things at once.
In the type of experience I am describing, it seems that the superconscious method of
thinking becomes conscious. We see the world as the whole body sees it, and for this very
reason there is the greatest difficulty in attempting to translate this mode of vision into a
form of language that is based on contrast and classification. To the extent, then, that man
has become a being centered in consciousness, he has become centered in clash, conflict,
and discord. He ignores, as beneath notice, the astounding perfection of his organism as a
whole, and this is why, in most people, there is such a deplorable disparity between the
intelligent and marvelous order of their bodies and the trivial preoccupations of their
consciousness. But in this other world the situation is reversed. Ordinary people look like
gods because the values of the organism are uppermost, and the concerns of consciousness
fall back into the subordinate position which they should properly hold. Love, unity,
harmony, and relationship therefore take precedence over war and division.
For what consciousness overlooks is the fact that all boundaries and divisions are held in
common by their opposite sides and areas, so that when a boundary changes its shape both
sides move together. It is like the yang-yin symbol of the Chinese—the black and white
fishes divided by an S-curve inscribed within a circle. The bulging head of one is the
narrowing tail of the other. But how much more difficult it is to see that my skin and its
movements belong both to me and to the external world, or that the spheres of influence of
different human beings have common walls like so many rooms in a house, so that the
movement of my wall is also the movement of yours. You can do what you like in your room
just so long as I can do what I like in mine. But each man's room is himself in his fullest
extension, so that my expansion is your contraction and vice versa.
I am looking at what I would ordinarily call a confusion of bushes—a tangle of plants and
weeds with branches and leaves going every which way. But now that the organizing,
relational mind is uppermost I see that what is confusing is not the bushes but my clumsy
method of thinking. Every twig is in its proper place, and the tangle has become an
arabesque more delicately ordered than the fabulous doodles in the margins of Celtic
manuscripts. In this same state of consciousness I have seen a woodland at fall, with the
whole multitude of almost bare branches and twigs in silhouette against the sky, not as a
confusion, but as the lacework or tracery of an enchanted jeweler. A rotten log bearing rows
of fungus and patches of moss became as precious as any work of Cellini—an inwardly
luminous construct of jet, amber, jade, and ivory, all the porous and spongy disintegrations
of the wood seeming to have been carved out with infinite patience and skill. I do not know
whether this mode of vision organizes the world in the same way that it organizes the body,
or whether it is just that the natural world is organized in that way.
A journey into this new mode of consciousness gives one a marvelously enhanced
appreciation of patterning in nature, a fascination deeper than ever with the structure of
ferns, the formation of crystals, the markings upon sea shells, the incredible jewelry of such
unicellular creatures of the ocean as the radiolaria, the fairy architecture of seeds and pods,
the engineering of bones and skeletons, the aerodynamics of feathers, and the astonishing
profusion of eye-forms upon the wings of butterflies and birds. All this involved delicacy of
organization may, from one point of view, be strictly functional for the purposes of
reproduction and survival. But when you come down to it, the survival of these creatures is
the same as their very existence—and what is that for?
More and more it seems that the ordering of nature is an art akin to music—fugues in shell
and cartilage, counterpoint in fibers and capillaries, throbbing rhythm in waves of sound,
light, and nerve. And oneself is connected with it quite inextricably—a node, a ganglion, an
electronic interweaving of paths, circuits, and impulses that stretch and hum through the
whole of time and space. The entire pattern swirls in its complexity like smoke in sunbeams
or the rippling networks of sunlight in shallow water. Transforming itself endlessly into itself,
the pattern alone remains. The crosspoints, nodes, nets, and curlicues vanish perpetually
into each other. "The baseless fabric of this vision." It is its own base. When the ground
dissolves beneath me I float.
Closed-eye fantasies in this world seem sometimes to be revelations of the secret workings
of the brain, of the associative and patterning processes, the ordering systems which carry
out all our sensing and thinking. Unlike the one I have just described, they are for the most
part ever more complex variations upon a theme—ferns sprouting ferns sprouting ferns in
multidimensional spaces, vast kaleidoscopic domes of stained glass or mosaic, or patterns
like the models of highly intricate molecules—systems of colored balls, each one of which
turns out to be a multitude of smaller balls, forever and ever. Is this, perhaps, an inner view
of the organizing process which, when the eyes are open, makes sense of the world even at
points where it appears to be supremely messy?
Later that same afternoon, Robert takes us over to his barn from which he has been
cleaning out junk and piling it into a big and battered Buick convertible, with all the stuffing
coming out of the upholstery. The sight of trash poses two of the great questions of human
life, "Where are we going to put it?" and "Who's going to clean up?" From one point of view
living creatures are simply tubes, putting things in at one end and pushing them out at the
other—until the tube wears out. The problem is always where to put what is pushed out at
the other end, especially when it begins to pile so high that the tubes are in danger of being
crowded off the earth by their own refuse. And the questions have metaphysical overtones,
"Where are we going to put it?" asks for the foundation upon which things ultimately rest—
the First Cause, the Divine Ground, the bases of morality, the origin of action. "Who's going
to clean up?" is asking where responsibility ultimately lies, or how to solve our evermultiplying problems other than by passing the buck to the next generation.
I contemplate the mystery of trash in its immediate manifestation: Robert's car piled high,
with only the driver's seat left unoccupied by broken door-frames, rusty stoves, tangles of
chicken-wire, squashed cans, insides of ancient harmoniums, nameless enormities of
cracked plastic, headless dolls, bicycles without wheels, torn cushions vomiting kapok, nonreturnable bottles, busted dressmakers' dummies, rhomboid picture-frames, shattered birdcages, and inconceivable messes of string, electric wiring, orange peels, eggshells, potato
skins, and light bulbs—all garnished with some ghastly-white chemical powder that we call
"angel shit." Tomorrow we shall escort this in a joyous convoy to the local dump. And then
what? Can any melting and burning imaginable get rid of these ever-rising mountains of
ruin—especially when the things we make and build are beginning to look more and more
like rubbish even before they are thrown away? The only answer seems to be that of the
present group. The sight of Robert's car has everyone helpless with hysterics.
The Divine Comedy. All things dissolve in laughter. And for Robert this huge heap of
marvelously incongruous uselessness is a veritable creation, a masterpiece of nonsense. He
slams it together and ropes it securely to the bulbous, low-slung wreck of the supposedly
chic convertible, and then stands back to admire it as if it were a float for a carnival.
Theme: the American way of life. Rut our laughter is without malice, for in this state of
consciousness everything is the doing of gods. The culmination of civilization in monumental
heaps of junk is seen, not as thoughtless ugliness, but as self-caricature—as the creation of
phenomenally absurd collages and abstract sculptures in deliberate but kindly mockery of
our own pretensions. For in this world nothing is wrong, nothing is even stupid. The senseof
wrong is simply failure to see where something fits into a pattern, to be confused as to the
hierarchical level upon which an event belongs—a play which seems quite improper at level
28 may be exactly right at level 96. I am speaking of levels or stages in the labyrinth of
twists and turns, gambits and counter-gambits, in which life is involving and evolving
itself—the cosmological one-upmanship which the yang and the yin, the light and the dark
principles, are forever playing, the game which at some early level in its development
seems to be the serious battle between good and evil. If the square may be defined "as one
who takes the game seriously, one must admire him for the very depth of his involvement,
for the courage to be so far-out that he doesn't know where he started.
The more prosaic, the more dreadfully ordinary anyone or anything seems to be, the more I
am moved to marvel at the ingenuity with which divinity hides in order to seek itself, at the
lengths to which this cosmic joie de vivre will go in elaborating its dance. I think of a comer
gas station on a hot afternoon. Dust and exhaust fumes, the regular Standard guy all
baseball and sports cars, the billboards halfheartedly gaudy, the flatness so reassuring—
nothing around here but just us folks! I can see people just pretending not to see that they
are avatars of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, that the cells of their bodies aren't millions of
gods, that the dust isn't a haze of jewels. How solemnly they would go through the act of
not understanding me if I were to step up and say, "Well, who do you think you're kidding?
Come off it, Shiva, you old rascal! It's a great act, but it doesn't fool me." But the conscious
ego doesn't know that it is something which that divine organ, the body, is only pretending
to be.* When people go to a guru, a master of wisdom, seeking a way out of darkness, all
he really does is to humor them in their pretense until they are outfaced into dropping it. He
tells nothing, but the twinkle in his eye speaks to the unconscious—"You know … You know!"
In the contrast world of ordinary consciousness man feels himself, as will, to be something
in nature but not of it. He likes it or dislikes it. He accepts it or resists it. He moves it or it
moves him. But in the basic super-consciousness of the whole organism this division does
not exist. The organism and its surrounding world are a single, integrated pattern of action
in which there is neither subject nor object, doer nor done to. At this level there is not one
thing called pain and another thing called myself, which dislikes pain. Pain and the
"response" to pain are the same thing. When this becomes conscious it feels as if everything
that happens is my own will. But this is a preliminary and clumsy way of feeling that what
happens outside the body is one process with what happens inside it. This is that "original
identity" which ordinary language and our conventional definitions of man so completely
conceal.
* ”Self-conscious man thinks he thinks. This has long been recognized to be an error, for the conscious subject who
thinks he thinks is not the same as the organ which does the thinking. The conscious person is one component
only, a series of transitory aspects, of the thinking person." L. L. Whyte, The Unconscious Before Freud (Basic
Books, New York, 1960), p. 59.
The active and the passive are two phases of the same act. A seed, floating in its white
sunburst of down, drifts across the sky, sighing with the sound of a jet plane invisible
above. I catch it by one hair between thumb and index finger, and am astonished to watch
this little creature actually wiggling and pulling as if it were struggling to get away.Common
sense tells me that this tugging is the action of the wind, not of the thistledown. But then I
recognize that it is the "intelligence" of the seed to have just such delicate antennae of silk
that, in an environment of wind, it can move. Having such extensions, it moves itself with
the wind. When it comes to it, is there any basic difference between putting up a sail and
pulling an oar? If anything, the former is a more intelligent use of effort than the latter.
True, the seed does not intend to move itself with the wind, but neither did I intend to have
arms and legs.
It is this vivid realization of the reciprocity of will and world, active and passive, inside and
outside, self and not-self, which evokes the aspect of these experiences that is most
puzzling from the standpoint of ordinary consciousness; the strange and seemingly unholy
conviction that "I" am God. In Western culture this sensation is seen as the very signature
of insanity. But in India it is simply a matter of course that the deepest center of man,
atman, is the deepest center of the universe, Brahman. Why not? Surely a continuous view
of the world is more whole, more holy, more healthy, than one in which there is a yawning
emptiness between the Cause and its effects. Obviously, the "I" which is God is not the ego,
the consciousness of self which is simultaneously an unconsciousness of the fact that its
outer limits are held in common with the inner limits of the rest of the world. But in this
wider, less ignorant consciousness I am forced to see that everything I claim to will and
intend has a common boundary with all I pretend to disown. The limits of what I will, the
form and shape of all those actions which I claim as mine, are identical and coterminous
with the limits of all those events which I have been taught to define as alien and external.
The feeling of self is no longer confined to the inside of the skin. Instead, my individual
being seems to grow out from the rest of the universe like a hair from a head or a limb from
a body, so that my center is also the center of the whole. I find that in ordinary
consciousness I am habitually trying to ring myself off from this totality, that I am
perpetually on the defensive. But what am I trying to protect? Only very occasionally are
my defensive attitudes directly concerned with warding off physical damage or deprivation.
For the most part I am defending my defenses: rings around rings around rings around
nothing. Guards inside a fortress inside entrenchments inside a radar curtain. The military
war is the outward parody of the war of ego versus world: only the guards are safe. In the
next war only the air force will outlive the women and children.
I trace myself back through the labyrinth of my brain, through the innumerable turns by
which I have ringed myself off and, by perpetual circling, obliterated the original trail
whereby I entered this forest. Back through the tunnels—through (he devious status-andsurvival strategy of adult life, through the interminable passages which we remember in
dreams—all the streets we have ever traveled, the corridors of schools, the winding
pathways between the legs of tables and chairs where one crawled as a child, the tight and
bloody exit from the womb, the fountainous surge through the channel of the penis, the
timeless wanderings through ducts and spongy caverns. Down and back through evernarrowing tubes to the point where the passage itself is the traveler—a thin string of
molecules going through the trial and error of getting itself into the right order to be a unit
of organic life. Relentlessly back and back through endless and whirling dances in the
astronomically proportioned spaces which surround the original nuclei of the world, the
centers of centers, as remotely distant on the inside as the nebulae beyond our galaxy on
the outside.
Down and at last out—out of the cosmic maze to recognize in and as myself, the bewildered
traveler, the forgotten yet familiar sensation of the original impulse of all things, supreme
identity, inmost light, ultimate center, self more me than myself. Standing in the midst of
Ella's garden I feel, with a peace so deep that it sings to be shared with all the world, that
at last I belong, that I have returned to the home behind home, that I have come into the
inheritance unknowingly bequeathed from all my ancestors since the beginning. Plucked like
the strings of a harp, the warp and woof of the world reverberate with memories of
triumphant hymns. The sure foundation upon which I had sought to stand has turned out to
be the center from which I seek. The elusive substance beneath all the forms of the
universe is discovered as the immediate gesture of my hand. But how did I ever get lost?
And why have I traveled so far through these intertwined tunnels that I seem to be the
quaking vortex of defended defensiveness which is my conventional self?
Going indoors I find that all the household furniture is alive. Everything gestures. Tables are
tabling, pots are potting, walls are walling, fixtures are fixturing—a world of events instead
of things. Robert turns on the phonograph, without telling me what is being played. Looking
intently at the pictures picturing, I only gradually become conscious of the music, and at
first cannot decide whether I am hearing an instrument or a human voice simply tailing. A
single stream of sound, curving, rippling, and jiggling with a soft snarl that at last reveals it
to be a reed instrument—some sort of oboe. Later, human voices join it. But they are not
singing words, nothing but a kind of "buoh—buah—bueeh" which seems to be exploring all
the liquidinous inflections of which the voice is capable. What has Robert got here? I
imagine it must be some of his far-out friends in a great session of nonsense-chanting. The
singing intensifies into the most refined, exuberant, and delightful warbling, burbling,
honking, hooting, and howling—which quite obviously means nothing whatsoever, and is
being done out of pure glee. There is a pause. A voice says, "Dit!" Another seems to reply,
"Da;" Then, "Dit-dal Di-ditty-da!" And getting gradually faster, "Da-di-ditty-di-ditty-da! Dida-di-ditty-ditty-da-di-da-di-ditty-da-da!" And so on, until the players are quite out of their
minds. The record cover, which Robert now shows me, says "Classical Music of India," and
informs me that this is a series edited by Alain Danielou, who happens to be the most
serious, esoteric, and learned scholar of Hindu music, and an exponent, in the line of Rene
Guenon and Ananda Coomara-swamy, of the most formal, traditional, and difficult
interpretation of Yoga and Vedanta. Somehow I cannot quite reconcile Danielou, the pandit
of pandits, with this delirious outpouring of human bird-song. I feel my leg is being pulled.
Or perhaps Danielou's leg.
But then, maybe not. Oh, indeed not! For quite suddenly I feel my understanding dawning
into a colossal clarity, as if everything were opening up down to the roots of my being and
of time and space themselves. The sense of the world becomes totally obvious. I am struck
with amazement that I or anyone could have thought life a problem or being a mystery. I
call to everyone to gather round.
"Listen, there's something I must tell. I've never, never seen it so clearly. But it doesn't
matter a bit if you don't understand, because each one of you is quite perfect as you are,
even if you don't know it. Life is basically a gesture, but no one, no thing, is making it.
There is no necessity for it to happen, and none for it to go on happening. For it isn't being
driven by anything; it just happens freely of itself. It's a gesture of motion, of sound, of
color, and just as no one is making it, it isn't happening to anyone. There is simply no
problem of life; it is completely purposeless play—exuberance which is its own end.
Basically there is the gesture. Time, space, and multiplicity are complications of it. There is
no reason whatever to explain it, for explanations are just another form of complexity, a
new manifestation of life on top of life, of gestures gesturing. Pain and suffering are simply
extreme forms of play, and there isn't anything in the whole universe to be afraid of
because it doesn't happen to anyone! There isn't any substantial ego at all. The ego is a
kind of flip, a knowing of knowing, a fearing of fearing. It's a curlicue, an extra jazz to
experience, a sort of double-take or reverberation, a dithering of consciousness which is the
same as anxiety."
Of course, to say that life is just a gesture, an action without agent, recipient, or purpose,
sounds much more empty and futile than joyous. But to me it seems that an ego, a
substantial entity to which experience happens, is more of a minus than a plus. It is an
estrangement from experience, a lack of participation. And in this moment I feel absolutely
with the world, free of that chronic resistance to experience which blocks the free flowing of
life and makes us move like muscle-bound dancers. But I don't have to overcome
resistance. I see that resistance, ego, is just an extra vortex in the stream-part of it—and
that in fact there is no actual resistance at all. There is no point from which to confront life,
or stand against it.
I go into the garden again. The hummingbirds are soaring up and falling in their mating
dance, as if there were someone behind the bushes playing ball with them. Fruit and more
wine have been put out on the table. Oranges—transformations of the sun into its own
image, as if the tree were acknowledging gratitude for warmth. Leaves, green with the pale,
yellow-fresh green that I remember from the springtimes of my childhood in Kentish
spinneys, where breaking buds were spotted all over the hazel branches in a floating mist.
Within them, trunks, boughs, and twigs moist black behind the sunlit green. Fuchsiabushes,
tangled traceries of stalks, intermingled with thousands of magenta ballerinas with purple
petticoats. And, behind all, towering into the near-twilight sky, the grove of giant eucalyptus
trees with their waving clusters of distinctly individual, bamboolike leaves. Everything here
is the visual form of the lilting nonsense and abandoned vocal dexterity of those Hindu
musicians.
I recall the words of an ancient Tantric scripture; "As waves come with water and flames
with fire, so the universal waves with us." Gestures of the gesture, waves of the wave—
leaves flowing into caterpillars, grass into cows, milk into babies, bodies into worms, earth
into flowers, seeds into birds, quanta of energy into the iridescent or reverberating
labyrinths of the brain. Within and swept up into this endless, exulting, cosmological dance
are the base and grinding undertones of the pain which transformation involves: chewed
nerve endings, sudden electric-striking snakes in the meadow grass, swoop of the lazily
circling hawks, sore muscles piling logs, sleepless nights trying to keep track of the
unrelenting bookkeeping which civilized survival demands.
How unfamiliarly natural it is to see pain as no longer a problem. For problematic pain arises
with the tendency of self-consciousness to short-circuit the brain and fill its passages with
dithering echoes—revulsions to revulsions, fears of fear, cringing from cringing, guilt about
guilt—twisting thought to trap itself in endless oscillations. In his ordinary consciousness
man lives like someone trying to speak in an excessively sensitive echo-chamber; he can
proceed only by doggedly ignoring the interminably gibbering reflections of his voice. For in
the brain there are echoes and reflected images in every dimension of sense, thought, and
feeling, chattering on and on in the tunnels of memory. The difficulty is that we confuse this
storing of information with an intelligent commentary on what we are doing at the moment,
mistaking for intelligence the raw materials of the data with which it works. Like too much
alcohol, self-consciousness makes us see ourselves double, and we mistake the double
image for two selves—mental and material controlling and controlled, reflective and
spontaneous. Thus instead of suffering we suffer about suffering, and suffer about suffering
about suffering.
As has always been said, clarity comes with the giving up of self. But what this means is
that we cease to attribute selfhood to these echoes and mirror images. Otherwise we stand
in a hall of mirrors, dancing hesitantly and irresolutely because we are making the images
take the lead. We move in circles because we are following what we have already done. We
have lost touch with our original identity, which is not the system of images but the great
self-moving gesture of this as yet unremembered moment. The gift of remembering and
binding time creates the illusion that the past stands to the present as agent to act, mover
to moved. Living thus from the past, with echoes taking the lead, we are not truly here, and
are always a little late for the feast. Yet could anything be more obvious than that the past
follows from the present like a comet's tail, and that if we are to be alive at all, here is the
place to be?
Evening at last closes a day that seemed to have been going on since the world began. At
the high end of the garden, above a clearing, there stands against the mountain wall a
semicircle of trees, immensely tall and dense with foliage, suggesting the entrance grove to
some ancient temple. It is from here that the deep blue-green transparency of twilight
comes down, silencing the birds and hushing our own conversation. We have been watching
the sunset, sitting in a row upon the ridgepole of the great barn whose roof of redwood
tiles, warped and cracked, sweeps clear to the ground. Below, to the west, lies an open
sward where two white goats are munching the grass, and beyond this is Robert's house
where lights in the kitchen show that Beryl is preparing dinner. Time to go in, and leave the
garden to the awakening stars.
Again music—harpsichords and a string orchestra, and Bach in his most exultant mood. I lie
down to listen, and close my eyes. All day, in wave after wave and from all directions of the
mind's compass, there has repeatedly come upon me the sense of my original identity as
one with the very fountain of the universe. I have seen, too, that the fountain is its own
source and motive, and that its spirit is an unbounded playfulness which is the manydimensioned dance of life. There is no problem left, but who will believe it? Will I believe it
myself when I return to normal consciousness? Yet I can see at the moment that this does
not matter. The play is hide-and-seek or lost-and-found, and it is all part of the play that
one can get very lost indeed. How far, then, can one go in getting found?
As if in answer to my question there appears before my closed eyes a vision in symbolic
form of what Eliot has called "the still point of the turning world." I find myself looking down
at the floor of a vast courtyard, as if from a window high upon the wall, and the floor and
the walls are entirely surfaced with ceramic tiles displaying densely involved arabesques in
gold, purple, and blue. The scene might be the inner court of some Persian palace, were it
not of such immense proportions and its colors of such preternatural transparency. In the
center of the floor there is a great sunken arena, shaped like a combination of star and
rose, and bordered with a strip of tiles that suggest the finest inlay work in vermilion, gold,
and obsidian.
Within this arena some kind of ritual is being performed in time with the music. At first its
mood is stately and royal, as if there were officers and courtiers in rich armor and manycolored cloaks dancing before their king. As I watch, the mood changes. The courtiers
become angels with wings of golden fire, and in the center of the arena there appears apool
of dazzling flame. Looking into the pool I see, just for a moment, a face which reminds me
of the Christos Pantocrator of Byzantine mosaics, and I feel that the angels are drawing
back with wings over their faces in a motion of reverent dread. But the face dissolves. The
pool of flame grows brighter and brighter, and I notice that the winged beings are drawing
back with a gesture, not of dread, but of tenderness—for the flame knows no anger. Its
warmth and radiance—"tongues of flame infolded"—are an efflorescence of love so
endearing that I feel I have seen the heart of all hearts.
Epilogue
This is, as I have said, a record not of one experiment with consciousness-changing drugs,
but of several, compressed for reasons of poetic unity into a single day. At the same time I
have more or less kept to the basic form which every individual experiment seems to take—
a sort of cycle in which one's personality is taken apart and then put together again, in what
one hopes is a more intelligent fashion. For example, one's true identity is first of all felt as
something extremely ancient, familiarly distant—with overtones of the magical,
mythological, and archaic. But in the end it revolves back to what one is in the immediate
present, for the moment of the world's creation is seen to lie, not in some unthinkably
remote past, but in the eternal now. Similarly, the play of life is at first apprehended rather
cynically as an extremely intricate contest in one-upmanship, expressing itself deviously
even in the most altruistic of human endeavors. Later, one begins to feel a "good old rascal"
attitude toward the system; humor gets the better of cynicism. But finally, rapacious and
all-embracing cosmic selfishness turns out to be a disguise for the unmotivated play of love.
But I do not mean to generalize. I am speaking only of what I have experienced for myself,
and I wish to repeat that drugs of this kind are in no sense bottled and predigested wisdom.
I feel that had I no skill as a writer or philosopher, drugs which dissolve some of the
barriers between ordinary, pedestrian consciousness and the multidimensional
superconsciousness of the organism would bring little but delightful, or sometimes
terrifying, confusion. I am not saying that only intellectuals can benefit from them, but that
there must be sufficient discipline or insight to relate this expanded consciousness to our
normal, everyday life.
Such aids to perception are medicines, not diets, and as the use of a medicine should lead
on to a more healthful mode of living, so the experiences which I have described suggest
measures we might take to maintain a sounder form of sanity. Of these, the most important
is the practice of what I would like to call meditation—were it not that this word often
connotes spiritual or mental gymnastics. But by meditation I do not mean a practice or
exercise undertaken as a preparation for something, as a means to some future end, or as a
discipline in which one is concerned with progress. A better word may be "contemplation" or
even "centering," for what I mean is a slowing down of time, of mental hurry, and an
allowing of one's attention to rest in the present—so coming to the unseeking observation,
not of what should be, but of what is. It is quite possible, even easy, to do this without the
aid of any drug, though these chemicals have the advantage of "doing it for you" in a
peculiarly deep and prolonged fashion.
But those of us who live in this driven and overpurposeful civilization need, more than
anyone else, to lay aside some span of clock time for ignoring time, and for allowing the
contents of consciousness to happen without interference. Within such timeless spaces,
perception has an opportunity to develop and deepen in much the same way that I have
described. Because one stops forcing experience with the conscious will and looking at
things as if one were confronting them, or standing aside from them to manage them, it is
possible for one's fundamental and unitive apprehension of the world to rise to the surface.
But it is of no use to make this a goal or to try to work oneself into that way of seeing
things. Every effort to change what is being felt or seen presupposes and confirms the
illusion of the independent knower or ego, and to try to get rid of what isn't there is only to
prolong confusion. On the whole, it is better to try to be aware of one's ego than to get rid
of it. We can then discover that the "knower" is no different from the sensation of the
"known," whether the known be "external" objects or "internal" thoughts and memories.
In this way it begins to appear that instead of knowers and knowns there are simply
knowings, and instead of doers and deeds simply doings. Divided matter and form becomes
unified pattern-in-process. Thus when Buddhists say that reality is "void" they mean simply
that life, the pattern-in-process, does not proceed from or fall upon some substantial basis.
At first, this may seem rather disconcerting, but in principle the idea is no more difficult to
abandon than that of the crystalline spheres which were once supposed to support and
move the planets.
Eventually this unified and timeless mode of perception "caps" our ordinary way of thinking
and acting in the practical world: it includes it without destroying it. But it also modifies it
by making it clear that the function of practical action is to serve the abiding present rather
than the ever-receding future, and the living organism rather than the mechanical system of
the state or the social order.
In addition to this quiet and contemplative mode of meditation there seems to me to be an
important place for another, somewhat akin to the spiritual exercises of the dervishes. No
one is more dangerously insane than one who is sane all the time: he is like a steel bridge
without flexibility, and the order of his life is rigid and brittle. The manners and mores of
Western civilization force this perpetual sanity upon us to an extreme degree, for there is no
accepted corner in our lives for the art of pure nonsense. Our play is never real play
because it is almost invariably rationalized; we do it on the pretext that it is good for us,
enabling us to go back to work refreshed. There is no protected situation in which we can
really let ourselves go. Day in and day out we must tick obediently like clocks, and "strange
thoughts" frighten us so much that we rush to the nearest head-doctor. Our difficulty is that
we have perverted the Sabbath into a day for laying on rationality and listening to sermons
instead of letting off steam.
If our sanity is to be strong and flexible, there must be occasional periods for the expression
of completely spontaneous movement—for dancing, singing, howling, babbling, jumping,
groaning, wailing—in short, for following any motion to which the organism as a whole
seems to be inclined. It is by no means impossible to set up physical and moral boundaries
within which this freedom of action is expressible—sensible contexts in which nonsense may
have its way. Those who provide for this essential irrationality will never become stuffy or
dull, and, what is far more important, they will be opening up the channels through which
the formative and intelligent spontaneity of the organism can at last flow into
consciousness. This is why free association is such a valuable technique in psychotherapy;
its limitation is that it is purely verbal. The function of such intervals for nonsense is not
merely to be an outlet for pent-up emotion or unused psychic energy, but to set in motion a
mode of spontaneous action which, though at first appearing as nonsense, can eventually
express itself in intelligible forms.
Disciplined action is generally mistaken for forced action, done in the dualistic spirit of
compelling oneself, as if the will were quite other than the rest of the organism. But a
unified and integrated concept of human nature requires a new concept of discipline—the
control, not of forced action, but of spontaneous action. It is necessary to see discipline as a
technique which the organism uses, as a carpenter uses tools, and not as a system to which
the organism must be conformed. Otherwise the purely mechanical and organizational ends
of the system assume greater importance than those of the organism. We find ourselves in
the situation where man is made for the Sabbath, instead of the Sabbath for man. But
before spontaneous action can be expressed in controlled patterns, its current must be set
in motion. That is to say, we must acquire a far greater sensitivity to what the organism
itself wants to do, and learn responsiveness to its inner motions,
Our language almost compels us to express this point in the wrong way—as if the "we" that
must be sensitive to the organism and respond to it were something apart. Unfortunately
our forms of speech follow the design of the social fiction which separates the conscious will
from the rest of the organism, making it the independent agent which causes and regulates
our actions. It is thus that we fail to recognize what the ego, the agent, or the conscious will
is. We do not see that it is a social convention, like the intervals of clock time, as distinct
from a biological or even psychological entity. For the conscious will, working against the
grain of instinct, is the interiorization, the inner echo, of social demands upon the individual
coupled with the picture of his role or identity which he acquires from parents, teachers,and
early associates. It is an imaginary, socially fabricated self working against the organism,
the self that is biologically grown. By means of this fiction the child is taught to control
himself and conform himself to the requirements of social life.
At first sight this seems to be an ingenious and highly necessary device for maintaining an
orderly society based upon individual responsibility. In fact it is a penny-wise, pound-foolish
blunder which is creating many more problems than it solves. To the degree that society
teaches the individual to identify himself with a controlling will separate from his total
organism, it merely intensifies his feeling of separateness, from himself and from others. In
the long run it aggravates the problem that it is designed to solve, because it creates a style
of personality in which an acute sense of responsibility is coupled with an acute sense of
alienation.
The mystical experience, whether induced by chemicals or other means, enables the
individual to be so peculiarly open and sensitive to organic reality that the ego begins to be
seen for the transparent abstraction that it is. In its place there arises (especially in the
latter phases of the drug experience) a strong sensation of oneness with others, presumably
akin to the sensitivity which enables a flock of birds to twist and turn as one body. A
sensation of this kind would seem to provide a far better basis for social love and order than
the fiction of the separate will.
The general effect of the drugs seems to be that they diminish defensive attitudes without
blurring perception, as in the case of alcohol. We become aware of things against which we
normally protect ourselves, and this accounts, I feel, for the high susceptibility to anxiety in
the early phases of the experience. But when defenses are down we begin to see, not
hallucinations, but customarily ignored aspects of reality—including a sense of social unity
which civilized man has long since lost. To regain this sense we do not need to abandon
culture and return to some precivilized level, for neither in the drug experience nor in more
general forms of mystical experience does one lose the skills or the knowledge which
civilization has produced.
I have suggested that in these experiences we acquire clues and insights which should be
followed up through certain forms of meditation. Are there not also ways in which we can,
even without using the drugs, come back to this sense of unity with other people? The
cultured Westerner has a very healthy distaste for crowds and for the loss of personal
identity in "herd-consciousness." But there is an enormous difference between a formless
crowd and an organic social group. The latter is a relatively small association in which every
member is in communication with every other member. The former is a relatively large
association in which the members are in communication only with a leader, and because of
this crude structure a crowd is not really an organism. To think of people as "the masses" is
to think of them by analogy with a subhuman style of order.
The corporate worship of churches might have been the natural answer to this need, were it
not that church services follow the crowd pattern instead of the group pattern. Participants
sit in rows looking at the backs of each other's necks, and are in communication only with
the leader—whether preacher, priest, or some symbol of an autocratic God. Many churches
try to make up for this lack of communion by "socials" and dances outside the regular
services. But these events have a secular connotation, and the type of communion involved
is always somewhat distant and demure. There are, indeed, discussion groups in which the
leader or "resource person" encourages every member to have his say, but, again, the
communion so achieved is merely verbal and ideational.
The difficulty is that the defended defensiveness of the ego recoils from the very thing that
would allay it—from associations with others based on physical gestures of affection, from
rites, dances, or forms of play which clearly symbolize mutual love between the members of
the group. Sometimes a play of this kind will occur naturally and unexpectedly between
close friends, but how embarrassing it might be to be involved in the deliberate organization
of such a relationship with total strangers! Nevertheless, there are countless associations of
people who, claiming to be firm friends, still lack the nerve to represent their affection for
each other by physical and erotic contact which might raise friendship to the level of love.
Our trouble is that we have ignored and thus feel insecure in the enormous spectrum of love
which lies between rather formal friendship and genital sexuality, and thus are always afraid
that once we overstep the bounds of formal friendship we must slide inevitably to the
extreme of sexual promiscuity, or worse, to homosexuality.
This unoccupied gulf between spiritual or brotherly love and sexual love corresponds to the
cleft between spirit and matter, mind and body, so divided that our affections or our
activities are assigned either to one or to the other. There is no continuum between the two,
and the lack of any connection, any intervening spectrum, makes spiritual love insipid and
sexual love brutal. To overstep the limits of brotherly love cannot, therefore, be understood
as anything but an immediate swing to its opposite pole. Thus the subtle and wonderful
gradations that lie between the two are almost entirely lost. In other words, .the greater
part of love is a relationship that we hardly allow, for love experienced only in its extreme
forms is like buying a loaf of bread and being given only the two heels.
I have no idea what can be done to correct this in a culture where personal identity seems
to depend on being physically aloof, and where many people shrink even from holding the
hand of someone with whom they have no formally sexual or familial tie. To force or make
propaganda for more affectionate contacts with others would bring little more than
embarrassment. One can but hope that in the years to come our defenses will crack
spontaneously, like eggshells when the birds are ready to hatch. This hope may gain some
encouragement from all those trends in philosophy and psychology, religion and science,
from which we are beginning to evolve a new image of man, not as a spirit imprisoned in
incompatible flesh, but as an organism inseparable from his social and natural environment.
This is certainly the view of man disclosed by these remarkable medicines which temporarily
dissolve our defenses and permit us to see what separative consciousness normally
ignores—the world as an interrelated whole. This vision is assuredly far beyond any druginduced hallucination or superstitious fantasy. It wears a striking resemblance to the
unfamiliar universe that physicists and biologists are trying to describe here and now. For
the clear direction of their thought is toward the revelation of a unified cosmology, no longer
sundered by the ancient irreconcilables of mind and matter, substance and attribute, thing
and event, agent and act, stuff and energy. And if this should come to be a universe in
which man is neither thought nor felt to be a lonely subject confronted by alien and
threatening objects, we shall have a cosmology not only unified but also joyous.
