PREFACE
During the past twenty years there has been an extraordinary
growth of interest in Zen Buddhism. Since the Second World War
this interest has increased so much that it seems to be becoming a
considerable force in the intellectual and artistic world of the West.
It is connected, no doubt, with the prevalent enthusiasm for
Japanese culture which is one of the constructive results of the late
war, but which may amount to no more than a passing fashion. The
deeper reason for this interest is that the viewpoint of Zen lies so
close to the “growing edge” of Western thought.
The more alarming and destructive aspects of Western civilization
should not blind us to the fact that at this very time it is also in one
of its most creative periods. Ideas and insights of the greatest
fascination are appearing in some of the newer fields of Western
science–in psychology and psychotherapy, in logic and the
philosophy of science, in semantics and communications theory.
Some of these developments might be due to suggestive influences
from Asian philosophy, but on the whole I am inclined to feel that
there is more of a parallelism than a direct influence. We are,
however, becoming aware of the parallelism, and it promises an
exchange of views which should be extremely stimulating.
Western thought has changed so rapidly in this century that we
are in a state of considerable confusion. Not only are there serious
diffculties of communication between the intellectual and the
general public, but the course of our thinking and of our very
history has seriously undermined the common-sense assumptions
which lie at the roots of our social conventions and institutions.
Familiar concepts of space, time, and motion, of nature and natural
law, of history and social change, and of human personality itself
have dissolved, and we find ourselves adrift without landmarks in a
universe which more and more resembles the Buddhist principle of
the “Great Void.” The various wisdoms of the West, religious,
philosophical, and scientific, do not over much guidance to the art
of living in such a universe, and we find the prospects of making
our way in so trackless an ocean of relativity rather frightening. For
we are used to absolutes, to firm principles and laws to which we
can cling for spiritual and psychological security.
This is why, I think, there is so much interest in a culturally
productive way of life which, for some fifteen hundred years, has
felt thoroughly at home in “the Void,” and which not only feels no
terror for it but rather a positive delight. To use its own words, the
situation of Zen has always been–
Above, not a tile to cover the head;
Below, not an inch of ground for the foot.
Such language should not actually be so unfamiliar to us, were we
truly prepared to accept the meaning of “the foxes have holes, and
the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of Man hath not where
to lay his head.”
I am not in favor of “importing” Zen from the Far East, for it has
become deeply involved with cultural institutions which are quite
foreign to us. But there is no doubt that there are things which we
can learn, or unlearn, from it and apply in our own way. It has the
special merit of a mode of expressing itself which is as intelligible–
or perhaps as ba8ing–to the intellectual as to the illiterate, offering
possibilities of communication which we have not explored. It has
a directness, verve, and humor, and a sense of both beauty and
nonsense at once exasperating and delightful. But above all it has a
way of being able to turn one’s mind inside out, and dissolving
what seemed to be the most oppressive human problems into
questions like “Why is a mouse when it spins?” At its heart there is
a strong but completely unsentimental compassion for human
beings suffering and perishing from their very attempts to save
themselves.
There are many excellent books about Zen, though some of the
best are out of print or otherwise diffcult to obtain. But as yet no
one–not even Professor Suzuki—has given us a comprehensive
account of the subject which includes its historical background and
its relation to Chinese and Indian ways of thought. The three
volumes of Suzuki’s Essays in Zen Buddhism are an unsystematic
collection of scholarly papers on various aspects of the subject,
enormously useful for the advanced student but quite ba8ing to the
general reader without an understanding of the general principles.
His delightful Introduction to Zen Buddhism is rather narrow and
specialized. It omits the essential information about the relation of
Zen to Chinese Taoism and Indian Buddhism, and is in some
respects rather more mystifying than it need be. His other works are
studies of special aspects of Zen, all of which require general
background and historical perspective.
R. H. Blyth’s Zen in English Literature and Oriental Classics is one
of the best introductions available, but it is published only in Japan
and, again, lacks the background information. As a series of
rambling and marvelously perceptive observations, it makes no
attempt to give an orderly presentation of the subject. My own
Spirit of Zen is a popularization of Suzuki’s earlier works, and
besides being very unscholarly it is in many respects out of date and
misleading, whatever merits it may have in the way of lucidity and
simplicity. Christmas Humphreys’ Zen Buddhism, published only in
England, is likewise a popularization of Suzuki and, once more,
does not really begin to put Zen in its cultural context. It is written
in a clear and sprightly fashion, but the author finds identities
between Buddhism and Theosophy which I feel to be highly
questionable. Other studies of Zen by both Western and Asian
authors are of a more specialized character, or are discussions of
Zen à propos of something else–psychology, art, or cultural history.
In default, then, of a fundamental, orderly, and comprehensive
account of the subject, it is no wonder that Western impressions of
Zen are somewhat confused, despite all the enthusiasm and interest
which it has aroused. The problem, then, is to write such a book–
and this I have tried to do since no one who understands the subject
better than I seems willing or able to do so. Ideally, I suppose, such
a work should be written by an accomplished and recognized Zen
master. But at present no such person has suffcient command of
English. Furthermore, when one speaks from within a tradition, and
especially from within its institutional hierarchy, there is always apt
to be a certain lack of perspective and grasp of the outsider’s
viewpoint. Again, one of the biggest obstacles to communication
between Japanese Zen masters and Westerners is the absence of
clarity as to difference of basic cultural premises. Both sides are so
“set in their ways” that they are unaware of the limitations of their
means of communication.
Perhaps, then, the most appropriate author of such a work would
be a Westerner who had spent some years under a Japanese master,
going through the whole course of Zen training. Now from the
standpoint of Western “scientific scholarship” this would not do at
all, for such a person would have become an “enthusiast” and
“partisan” incapable of an objective and disinterested view. But,
fortunately or unfortunately, Zen is above all an experience,
nonverbal in character, which is simply inaccessible to the purely
literary and scholarly approach. To know what Zen is, and
especially what it is not, there is no alternative but to practice it, to
experiment with it in the concrete so as to discover the meaning
which underlies the words. Yet such Westerners as have undergone
some of the special type of training followed in Rinzai Zen tend to
become “cagey” and uncommunicative on the principle that
Those who know do not speak;
Those who speak do not know.
Although, however, they do not “put up,” they do not completely
“shut up.” On the one hand, they would love to share their
understanding with others. But on the other hand, they are
convinced that words are ultimately futile, and are, furthermore,
under an agreement not to discuss certain aspects of their training.
They begin, therefore, to take the characteristically Asian attitude of
“Come and find out for yourself.” But the scientifically trained
Westerner is, not without reason, a cautious and skeptical fellow
who likes to know what he is “getting into.” He is acutely conscious
of the capacity of the mind for self-deception, for going into places
where entrance is impossible without leaving one’s critical
perspective at the door. Asians tend so much to despise this
attitude, and their Western devotees even more so, that they neglect
to tell the scientific inquirer many things that are still well within
the possibilities of human speech and intellectual understanding.
To write about Zen is, therefore, as problematic for the outside,
“objective” observer as for the inside, “subjective” disciple. In
varying situations I have found myself on both sides of the
dilemma. I have associated and studied with the “objective
observers” and am convinced that, for all their virtues, they
invariably miss the point and eat the menu instead of the dinner. I
have also been on the inside of a traditional hierarchy–not Zen–and
am equally convinced that from this position one does not know
what dinner is being eaten. In such a position one becomes
technically “idiotic,” which is to say, out of communication with
those who do not belong to the same fold.
It is both dangerous and absurd for our world to be a group of
communions mutually excommunicate. This is especially true of the
great cultures of the East and the West, where the potentialities of
communication are the richest, and the dangers of failure to
communicate the worst. As one who has spent somewhat more than
twenty years trying to interpret the East to the West, I have become
increasingly certain that to interpret such a phenomenon as Zen
there is a clear principle to be followed. On the one hand, it is
necessary to be sympathetic and to experiment personally with the
way of life to the limit of one’s possibilities. On the other hand, one
must resist every temptation to “join the organization,” to become
involved with its institutional commitments. In this friendly neutral
position one is apt to be disowned by both sides. But, at the worst,
one’s misrepresentations provoke them to express themselves more
clearly. For the relationship between two positions becomes far
more clear when there is a third with which to compare them. Thus
even if this study of Zen does no more than express a standpoint
which is neither Zen nor anything Western, it will at least provide
that third point of reference.
However, there can be no doubt that the essential standpoint of
Zen refuses to be organized, or to be made the exclusive possession
of any institution. If there is anything in this world which transcends
the relativities of cultural conditioning, it is Zen–by whatever name
it may be called. This is an excellent reason for Zen’s not being
institutionalized, and for the fact that many of its ancient exponents
were “universal individualists” who were never members of any
Zen organization, and never sought the acknowledgment of any
formal authority.
This, then, is my position with respect to Zen–and I feel I should
be frank with the reader in a day when there is so much anxiety
about people’s credentials or “quantifications.” I cannot represent
myself as a Zenist, or even as a Buddhist, for this seems to me to be
like trying to wrap up and label the sky. I cannot represent myself
as a scientifically objective academician, for–with respect to Zen–
this seems to me to be like studying bird–song in a collection of
stuffed nightingales. I claim no rights to speak of Zen. I claim only
the pleasure of having studied its literature and observed its art
forms since I was hardly more than a boy, and of having had the
delight of informal association with a number of Japanese and
Chinese travelers of the same trackless way.
This book is intended both for the general reader and for the
more serious student, and I trust that the former will be tolerant of
the use of some technical terminology, a Chinese character
appendix, and other critical apparatus most useful for those who
wish to explore the subject more deeply. The book is divided into
two parts, the first dealing with the background and history of Zen,
and the second with its principles and practice. The sources of
information are of three types. I have, firstly, used almost all the
studies of Zen in European languages. Naturally, I have made
considerable use of the works of Professor D. T. Suzuki, but at the
same time I have tried not to rely upon them too heavily–not
because of any defect in them, but because I think readers are
entitled to something more, by way of a fresh viewpoint, than a
mere summarization of his views.
Secondly, I have based the essential view of Zen here presented
upon a careful study of the more important of its early Chinese
records, with special reference to the Hsin-hsin Ming, the T’an
Ching or Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, the Lin-chi Lu, and the Kutsun-hsü Yü-lu. My own knowledge of T’ang dynasty Chinese is
certainly not enough to deal with some of the finer points of this
literature, but sufficient, I think, to get what I wanted, which was a
clear view of the essential doctrine. In all this, my efforts have been
greatly aided by colleagues and research associates at the American
Academy of Asian Studies, and I wish in particular to express my
thanks to Professors Sabro Hasegawa and Gi-ming Shien, to Dr. Paul
and Dr. George Fung, Dr. Frederick Hong, Mr. Charles Yick, and to
Mr. Kazumitsu Kato, priest of the Soto-Zen School.
Thirdly, my information is derived from a large number of
personal encounters with teachers and students of Zen, spread over
more than twenty years.
In the following pages the translations from the original texts are
my own, unless otherwise indicated. For the convenience of those
who read Chinese, I have supplied, following the Bibliography, an
appendix of the original Chinese forms of the more important
quotations and technical terms. I have found these almost essential
for the more serious student, for even among the most highly
qualified scholars there is still much uncertainty as to the proper
translation of T’ang dynasty Zen texts. References to this appendix
are by superscribed index letters in alphabetical order.
References to other works are by surname of the author and
number, directing the reader to the Bibliography for full details.
Scholarly readers will have to excuse me for not using the absurd
diacritical marks in romanized Sanskrit words, since these are
merely confusing to the general reader and unnecessary to the
Sanskritist who will at once call to mind the Devanagiri script. As to
the proper names of Zen masters and titles of Zen texts, these are
given in the romanized forms of Mandarin or Japanese according to
the country of origin, and technical terms are given in Mandarin
unless used in the discussion of specifically Japanese Zen. For
Mandarin one is almost compelled by general usage to adopt the
Wade-Giles romanization, for which I have appended a table of
pronunciation following this Preface, since it has so little relation to
the actual sounds.
I am most grateful to Mr. R. H. Blyth for his kind permission to
quote a number of his translations of haiku poems from his
magnificent four-volume anthology, Haiku, published by the
Hokuseido Press in Tokyo; to Professor Sabro Hasegawa for his
generous help in preparing the jacket and providing illustrations;
and to my daughter Joan for the photographs of Ryoanji.
In conclusion, I am most happy to express my thanks to the
Bollingen Foundation for a three-year fellowship, during which
much of the preliminary study was done for the writing of this
book.
ALAN W. WATTS
Mill Valley, California
July 1956
THE PRONUNCIATION OF CHINESE WORDS
Consonants
Aspirated: Read p’, t’, k’, ch’, and ts’ as in pin, tip,
kilt, chin, and bits.
Unaspirated: Read p, t, k, ch, and ts (or tz) as in
bin, dip, gilt, gin, and bids.
 hs or sh, as in shoe.
j is nearly like an “unrolled” r, so that jen is nearly
the English wren.

Vowels Usually Italian values,
 a as in father
 e as in eight
 eh as in brother
 i as in machine and pin
 ih as in shirt
 o as in soap
 u as in goose
 ü as in German über

Diphthongs ai as in light
 ao as in loud
 ei as in weight
 ia as in William
 ieh as in Korea
 ou as in group
 ua as in swan
 ueh as in doer
 ui as in sway
 uo as in whoah!

Combinations an and ang as in bun and bung
 en and eng as in wooden and among
 in and ing as in sin and sing
 un and ung with the u as in look.

PART ONE
BACKGROUND AND HISTORY
One
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE TAO
Zen Buddhism is a way and a view of life which does not belong to
any of the formal categories of modern Western thought. It is not
religion or philosophy; it is not a psychology or a type of science. It
is an example of what is known in India and China as a “way of
liberation,” and is similar in this respect to Taoism, Vedanta, and
Yoga. As will soon be obvious, a way of liberation can have no
positive de.nition. It has to be suggested by saying what it is not,
somewhat as a sculptor reveals an image by the act of removing
pieces of stone from a block.
Historically, Zen may be regarded as the ful.llment of long
traditions of Indian and Chinese culture, though it is actually much
more Chinese than Indian, and, since the twelfth century, it has
rooted itself deeply and most creatively in the culture of Japan. As
the fruition of these great cultures, and as a unique and peculiarly
instructive example of a way of liberation, Zen is one of the most
precious gifts of Asia to the world.
The origins of Zen are as much Taoist as Buddhist, and, because
its 1avor is so peculiarly Chinese, it may be best to begin by
inquiring into its Chinese ancestry–illustrating, at the same time,
what is meant by a way of liberation by the example of Taoism.
Much of the diffculty and mysti.cation which Zen presents to the
Western student is the result of his unfamiliarity with Chinese ways
of thinking–ways which di5er startlingly from our own and which
are, for that very reason, of special value to us in attaining a critical
perspective upon our own ideas. The problem here is not simply
one of mastering di5erent ideas, differing from our own as, say, the
theories of Kant differ from those of Descartes, or those of Calvinists
from those of Catholics. The problem is to appreciate di5erences in
from those of Catholics. The problem is to appreciate di5erences in
the basic premises of thought and in the very methods of thinking,
and these are so often overlooked that our interpretations of
Chinese philosophy are apt to be a projection of characteristically
Western ideas into Chinese terminology. This is the inevitable
disadvantage of studying Asian philosophy by the purely literary
methods of Western scholarship, for words can be communicative
only between those who share similar experiences.
This is not to go so far as to say that so rich and subtle a language
as English is simply incapable of expressing Chinese ideas. On the
contrary, it can say much more than has been believed possible by
some Chinese and Japanese students of Zen and Taoism whose
familiarity with English leaves something to be desired. The
diffculty is not so much in the language as in the thought-patterns
which have hitherto seemed inseparable from the academic and
scienti.c way of approaching a subject. The unsuitability of these
patterns for such subjects as Taoism and Zen is largely responsible
for the impression that the “Oriental mind” is mysterious, irrational,
and inscrutable. Furthermore, it need not be supposed that these
matters are so peculiarly Chinese or Japanese that they have no
point of contact with anything in our own culture. While it is true
that none of the formal divisions of Western science and thought
corresponds to a way of liberation, R. H. Blyth’s marvelous study of
Zen in English Literature has shown most clearly that the essential
insights of Zen are universal.
The reason why Taoism and Zen present, at first sight, such a
puzzle to the Western mind is that we have taken a restricted view
of human knowledge. For us, almost all knowledge is what a Taoist
would call conventional knowledge, because we do not feel that we
really know anything unless we can represent it to ourselves in
words, or in some other system of conventional signs such as the
notations of mathematics or music. Such knowledge is called
conventional because it is a matter of social agreement as to the
codes of communication. Just as people speaking the same
language have tacit agreements as to what words shall stand for
what things, so the members of every society and every culture are
united by bonds of communication resting upon all kinds of
agreement as to the classi.cation and valuation of actions and
things.
Thus the task of education is to make children fit to live in a
society by persuading them to learn and accept its codes–the rules
and conventions of communication whereby the society holds itself
together. There is first the spoken language. The child is taught to
accept “tree” and not “boojum” as the agreed sign for that (pointing
to the object). We have no diffculty in understanding that the word
“tree” is a matter of convention. What is much less obvious is that
convention also governs the delineation of the thing to which the
word is assigned. For the child has to be taught not only what
words are to stand for what things, but also the way in which his
culture has tacitly agreed to divide things from each other, to mark
out the boundaries within our daily experience. Thus scientific
convention decides whether an eel shall be a fish or a snake, and
grammatical convention determines what experiences shall be
called objects and what shall be called events or actions. How
arbitrary such conventions may be can be seen from the question,
“What happens to my .st [noun-object] when I open my hand?”
The object miraculously vanishes because an action was disguised
by a part of speech usually assigned to a thing! In English the
di5erences between things and actions are clearly, if not always
logically, distinguished, but a great number of Chinese words do
duty for both nouns and verbs–so that one who thinks in Chinese
has little diffculty in seeing that objects are also events, that our
world is a collection of processes rather than entities.
Besides language, the child has to accept many other forms of
code. For the necessities of living together require agreement as to
codes of law and ethics, of etiquette and art, of weights, measures,
and numbers, and, above all, of role. We have diffculty in
communicating with each other unless we can identify ourselves in
terms of roles–father, teacher, worker, artist, “regular guy,”
gentleman, sportsman, and so forth. To the extent that we identify
ourselves with these stereotypes and the rules of behavior
associated with them, we ourselves feel that we are someone
because our fellows have less diffculty in accepting us-that is, in
identifying us and feeling that we are “under control.” A meeting of
two strangers at a party is always somewhat embarrassing when the
host has not identified their roles in introducing them, for neither
knows what rules of conversation and action should be observed.
Once again, it is easy to see the conventional character of roles.
For a man who is a father may also be a doctor and an artist, as
well as an employee and a brother. And it is obvious that even the
sum total of these role labels will be far from supplying an
adequate description of the man himself, even though it may place
him in certain general classifications. But the conventions which
govern human identity are more subtle and much less obvious than
these. We learn, very thoroughly though far less explicitly, to
identify ourselves with an equally conventional view of “myself.”
For the conventional “self” or “person” is composed mainly of a
history consisting of selected memories, and beginning from the
moment of parturition. According to convention, I am not simply
what I am doing now. I am also what I have done, and my
conventionally edited version of my past is made to seem almost
more the real “me” than what I am at this moment. For what I am
seems so fleeting and intangible, but what I was is fixed and final. It
is the firm basis for predictions of what I will be in the future, and
so it comes about that I am more closely identi.ed with what no
longer exists than with what actually is!
It is important to recognize that the memories and past events
which make up a man’s historical identity are no more than a
selection. From the actual infinitude of events and experiences
some have been picked out–abstracted–as significant, and this
significance has of course been determined by conventional
standards. For the very nature of conventional knowledge is that it
is a system of abstractions. It consists of signs and symbols in which
things and events are reduced to their general outlines, as the
Chinese character j e n a stands for “man” by being the utmost
simplification and generalization of the human form.
The same is true of words other than ideographs. The English
words “man,” “fish,” “star,” “flower,” “run,” “grow,” all denote
classes of objects or events which may be recognized as members of
their class by very simple attributes, abstracted from the total
complexity of the things themselves.
Abstraction is thus almost a necessity for communication, since it
enables us to represent our experiences with simple and rapidly
made “grasps” of the mind. When we say that we can think only of
one thing at a time, this is like saying that the Pacific Ocean cannot
be swallowed at a gulp. It has to be taken in a cup, and downed bit
by bit. Abstractions and conventional signs are like the cup; they
reduce experience to units simple enough to be comprehended one
at a time. In a similar way, curves are measured by reducing them
to a sequence of tiny straight lines, or by thinking of them in terms
of the squares which they cross when plotted on graph paper.
Other examples of the same process are the newspaper
photograph and the transmission of television. In the former, a
natural scene is reproduced in terms of light and heavy dots
arranged in a screen or gridlike pattern so as to give the general
impression of a black-and-white photograph when seen without a
magnifying glass. Much as it may look like the original scene, it is
only a reconstruction of the scene in terms of dots, somewhat as our
conventional words and thoughts are reconstructions of experience
in terms of abstract signs. Even more like the thought process, the
television camera transmits a natural scene in terms of a linear
series of impulses which may be passed along a wire.
Thus communication by conventional signs of this type gives us
an abstract, one-at-a-time translation of a universe in which things
are happening altogether-at-once–a universe whose concrete reality
always escapes perfect description in these abstract terms. The
perfect description of a small particle of dust by these means would
take everlasting time, since one would have to account for every
point in its volume.
The linear, one-at-a-time character of speech and thought is
particularly noticeable in all languages using alphabets,
representing experience in long strings of letters. It is not easy to
say why we must communicate with others (speak) and with
ourselves (think) by this one-at-a-time method. Life itself does not
proceed in this cumbersome, linear fashion, and our own organisms
could hardly live for a moment if they had to control themselves by
taking thought of every breath, every beat of the heart, and every
neural impulse. But if we are to find some explanation for this
characteristic of thought, the sense of sight o5ers a suggestive
analogy. For we have two types of vision–central and peripheral,
not unlike the spotlight and the floodlight. Central vision is used for
accurate work like reading, in which our eyes are focused on one
small area after another like spotlights. Peripheral vision is less
conscious, less bright than the intense ray of the spotlight. We use it
for seeing at night, and for taking “subconscious” notice of objects
and movements not in the direct line of central vision. Unlike the
spotlight, it can take in very many things at a time.
There is, then, an analogy–and perhaps more than mere analogy–
between central vision and conscious, one-at-a-time thinking, and
between peripheral vision and the rather mysterious process which
enables us to regulate the incredible complexity of our bodies
without thinking at all. It should be noted, further, that we call our
bodies complex as a result of trying to understand them in terms of
linear thought, of words and concepts. But the complexity is not so
much in our bodies as in the task of trying to understand them by
this means of thinking. It is like trying to make out the features of a
large room with no other light than a single bright ray. It is as
complicated as trying to drink water with a fork instead of a cup.
In this respect, the Chinese written language has a slight
advantage over our own, and is perhaps symptomatic of a di5erent
way of thinking. It is still linear, still a series of abstractions taken
in one at a time. But its written signs are a little closer to life than
spelled words because they are essentially pictures, and, as a
Chinese proverb puts it, “One showing is worth a hundred sayings.”
Compare, for example, the ease of showing someone how to tie a
complex knot with the diffculty of telling him how to do it in
words alone.
Now the general tendency of the Western mind is to feel that we
do not really understand what we cannot represent, what we cannot
communicate, by linear signs–by thinking. We are like the
“wallflower” who cannot learn a dance unless someone draws him
a diagram of the steps, who cannot “get it by the feel.” For some
reason we do not trust and do not fully use the “peripheral vision”
of our minds. We learn music, for example, by restricting the whole
range of tone and rhythm to a notation of fixed tonal and rhythmic
intervals–a notation which is incapable of representing Oriental
music. But the Oriental musician has a rough notation which he
uses only as a reminder of a melody. He learns music, not by
reading notes, but by listening to the performance of a teacher,
getting the “feel” of it, and copying him, and this enables him to
acquire rhythmic and tonal sophistications matched only by those
Western jazz artists who use the same approach.
We are not suggesting that Westerners simply do not use the
“peripheral mind.” Being human, we use it all the time, and every
artist, every workman, every athlete calls into play some special
development of its powers. But it is not academically and
philosophically respectable. We have hardly begun to realize its
possibilities, and it seldom, if ever, occurs to us that one of its most
important uses is for that “knowledge of reality” which we try to
attain by the cumbersome calculations of theology, metaphysics,
and logical inference.
When we turn to ancient Chinese society, we find two
“philosophical” traditions playing complementary parts–
Confucianism and Taoism. Generally speaking, the former concerns
itself with the linguistic, ethical, legal, and ritual conventions which
provide the society with its system of communication.
Confucianism, in other words, preoccupies itself with conventional
knowledge, and under its auspices children are brought up so that
their originally wayward and whimsical natures are made to fit the
Procrustean bed of the social order. The individual defines himself
and his place in society in terms of the Confucian formulae.
Taoism, on the other hand, is generally a pursuit of older men,
and especially of men who are retiring from active life in the
community. Their retirement from society is a kind of outward
symbol of an inward liberation from the bounds of conventional
patterns of thought and conduct. For Taoism concerns itself with
unconventional knowledge, with the understanding of life directly,
instead of in the abstract, linear terms of representational thinking.
Confucianism presides, then, over the socially necessary task of
forcing the original spontaneity of life into the rigid rules of
convention–a task which involves not only con1ict and pain, but
also the loss of that peculiar naturalness and un-self-consciousness
for which little children are so much loved, and which is sometimes
regained by saints and sages. The function of Taoism is to undo the
inevitable damage of this discipline, and not only to restore but also
to develop the original spontaneity, which is termed tzu-jan b or
“self-so-ness.” For the spontaneity of a child is still childish, like
everything else about him. His education fosters his rigidity but not
his spontaneity. In certain natures, the con1ict between social
convention and repressed spontaneity is so violent that it manifests
itself in crime, insanity, and neurosis, which are the prices we pay
for the otherwise undoubted benefits of order.
But Taoism must on no account be understood as a revolution
against convention, although it has sometimes been used as a
pretext for revolution. Taoism is a way of liberation, which never
comes by means of revolution, since it is notorious that most
revolutions establish worse tyrannies than they destroy. To be free
from convention is not to spurn it but not to be deceived by it. It is
to be able to use it as an instrument instead of being used by it.
The West has no recognized institution corresponding to Taoism
because our Hebrew-Christian spiritual tradition identifies the
Absolute–God–with the moral and logical order of convention. This
might almost be called a major cultural catastrophe, because it
weights the social order with excessive authority, inviting just those
revolutions against religion and tradition which have been so
characteristic of Western history. It is one thing to feel oneself in
con1ict with socially sanctioned conventions, but quite another to
feel at odds with the very root and ground of life, with the Absolute
itself. The latter feeling nurtures a sense of guilt so preposterous
that it must issue either in denying one’s own nature or in rejecting
God. Because the first of these alternatives is ultimately impossible–
like chewing of one’s own teeth–the second becomes inevitable,
where such palliatives as the confessional are no longer effective. As
is the nature of revolutions, the revolution against God gives place
to the worse tyranny of the absolutist state–worse because it cannot
even forgive, and because it recognizes nothing outside the powers
of its jurisdiction. For while the latter was theoretically true of God,
his earthly representative the Church was always prepared to admit
that though the laws of God were immutable, no one could
presume to name the limits of his mercy. When the throne of the
Absolute is left vacant, the relative usurps it and commits the real
idolatry, the real indignity against God–the absolutizing of a
concept, a conventional abstraction. But it is unlikely that the
throne would have become vacant if, in a sense, it had not been so
already–if the Western tradition had had some way of
apprehending the Absolute directly, outside the terms of the
conventional order.
Of course the very word “Absolute” suggests to us something
abstract and conceptual, such as “Pure Being.” Our very idea of
“spirit” as opposed to “matter” seems to have more kinship with
the abstract than the concrete. But with Taoism, as with other ways
of liberation, the Absolute must never be confused with the abstract.
On the other hand, if we say that the Tao,c as the ultimate Reality is
called, is the concrete rather than the abstract, this may lead to still
other confusions. For we are accustomed to associate the concrete
with the material, the physiological, the biological, and the natural,
as distinct from the supernatural. But from the Taoist and Buddhist
standpoints these are still terms for conventional and abstract
spheres of knowledge.
Biology and physiology, for example, are types of knowledge
which represent the real world in terms of their own special
abstract categories. They measure and classify that world in ways
appropriate to the particular uses they want to make of it,
somewhat as a surveyor deals with earth in terms of acres, a
contractor in truckloads or tons, and a soil analyst in types of
chemical structures. To say that the concrete reality of the human
organism is physiological is like saying that the earth is so many
tons or acres. And to say that this reality is natural is accurate
enough if we mean spontaneous (tzu-jan) or natura naturans
enough if we mean spontaneous (tzu-jan) or natura naturans
(“nature naturing”). But it is quite inaccurate if we mean natura
naturata (“nature natured”), that is to say, nature classified, sorted
into “natures” as when we ask, “What is the nature of this thing?” It
is in this sense of the word that we must think of “scienti.c
naturalism,” a doctrine which has nothing in common with the
naturalism of Taoism.
Thus to begin to understand what Taoism is about, we must at
least be prepared to admit the possibility of some view of the
world other than the conventional, some knowledge other than the
contents of our surface consciousness, which can apprehend reality
only in the form of one abstraction (or thought, the Chinese nien d)
at a time. There is no real diffculty in this, for we will already
admit that we “know” how to move our hands, how to make a
decision, or how to breathe, even though we can hardly begin to
explain how we do it in words. We know how to do it because we
just do it! Taoism is an extension of this kind of knowledge, an
extension which gives us a very different view of ourselves from
that to which we are conventionally accustomed, and a view which
liberates the human mind from its constricting identification with
the abstract ego.
According to tradition, the originator of Taoism, Lao-tzu, was an
older contemporary of Kung Fu-tzu, or Confucius, who died in 479
B.C.1 Lao-tzu is said to have been the author of the Tao Te Ching, a
short book of aphorisms, setting forth the principles of the Tao and
its power or virtue (T e e). But traditional Chinese philosophy
ascribes both Taoism and Confucianism to a still earlier source, to a
work which lies at the very foundation of Chinese thought and
culture, dating anywhere from 3000 to 1200 B.C. This is the I
Ching, or Book of Changes.
T he I Ching is ostensibly a book of divination. It consists of
oracles based on sixty-four abstract figures, each of which is
composed of six lines. The lines are of two kinds—divided
(negative) and undivided (positive)— and the six-line figures, or
hexagrams, are believed to have been based on the various ways in
which a tortoise shell will crack when heated. This refers to an
ancient method of divination in which the soothsayer bored a hole
in the back of a tortoise shell, heated it, and then foretold the future
from the cracks in the shell so formed, much as palmists use the
lines on the hand. Naturally, these cracks were most complicated,
and the sixty-four hexagrams are supposed to be a simpli.ed
classi.cation of the various patterns of cracks. For many centuries
now the tortoise shell has fallen into disuse, and instead the
hexagram appropriate to the moment in which a question is asked
of the oracle is determined by the random division of a set of fifty
yarrow stalks.
But an expert in the I Ching need not necessarily use tortoise
shells or yarrow stalks. He can “see” a hexagram in anything–in the
chance arrangement of a bowl of 1owers, in objects scattered upon
a table, in the natural markings on a pebble. A modern psychologist
will recognize in this something not unlike a Rorschach test, in
which the psychological condition of a patient is diagnosed from
the spontaneous images which he “sees” in a complex ink-blot.
Could the patient interpret his own projections upon the ink-blot,
he would have some useful information about himself for the
guidance of his future conduct. In view of this, we cannot dismiss
the divinatory art of the I Ching as mere superstition.
Indeed, an exponent of the I Ching might give us quite a tough
argument about the relative merits of our ways for making
important decisions. We feel that we decide rationally because we
base our decisions on collecting relevant data about the matter in
hand. We do not depend upon such irrelevant tri1es as the chance
tossing of a coin, or the patterns of tea leaves or cracks in a shell.
Yet he might ask whether we really know what information is
relevant, since our plans are constantly upset by utterly unforeseen
incidents. He might ask how we know when we have collected
enough information upon which to decide. If we were rigorously
“scienti.c” in collecting information for our decisions, it would take
us so long to collect the data that the time for action would have
passed long before the work had been completed. So how do we
know when we have enough? Does the information itself tell us
that it is enough? On the contrary, we go through the motions of
gathering the necessary information in a rational way, and then, just
because of a hunch, or because we are tired of thinking, or because
the time has come to decide, we act. He would ask whether this is
not depending just as much upon “irrelevant tri1es” as if we had
been casting the yarrow stalks.
In other words, the “rigorously scientific” method of predicting
the future can be applied only in special cases–where prompt
action is not urgent, where the factors involved are largely
mechanical, or in circumstances so restricted as to be trivial. By far
the greater part of our important decisions depend upon “hunch”–
in other words, upon the “peripheral vision” of the mind. Thus the
reliability of our decisions rests ultimately upon our ability to “feel”
the situation, upon the degree to which this “peripheral vision” has
been developed.
Every exponent of the I Ching knows this. He knows that the
book itself does not contain an exact science, but rather a useful
tool which will work for him if he has a good “intuition,” or if, as
he would say, he is “in the Tao.” Thus one does not consult the
oracle without proper preparation, without going quietly and
meticulously through the prescribed rituals in order to bring the
mind into that calm state where the “intuition” is felt to act more
e5ectively. It would seem, then, that if the origins of Taoism are to
be found in the I Ching, they are not so much in the text of the
book itself as in the way in which it was used and in the
assumptions underlying it. For experience in making decisions by
intuition might well show that this “peripheral” aspect of the mind
works best when we do not try to interfere with it, when we trust it
to work by itself–tzu-jan, spontaneously, “self-so.”
Thus the basic principles of Taoism begin to unfold themselves.
There is, first of all, the Tao–the inde.nable, concrete “process” of
the world, the Way of life. The Chinese word means originally a
way or road, and sometimes “to speak,” so that the first line of the
Tao Te Ching contains a pun on the two meanings:
The Tao which can be spoken is not eternal Tao.
But in trying at least to suggest what he means, Lao-tzu says:
There was something vague before heaven and earth arose. How
calm! How void! It stands alone, unchanging; it acts everywhere,
untiring. It may be considered the mother of everything under
heaven. I do not know its name, but call it by the word Tao. (25)
And again:
The Tao is something blurred and indistinct.
How indistinct! How blurred!
Yet within it are images.
How blurred! How indistinct!
Yet within it are things.
How dim! How confused!
Yet within it is mental power.
Because this power is most true,
Within it there is confidence. (21)
“Mental! power” is ching, g a word which combines the ideas of
essential, subtle, psychic or spiritual, and skillful. For the point
seems to be that as one’s own head looks like nothing to the eyes
yet is the source of intelligence, so the vague, void-seeming, and
inde.nable Tao is the intelligence which shapes the world with a
skill beyond our understanding.
The important difference between the Tao and the usual idea of
God is that whereas God produces the world by making (wei h), the
Tao produces it by “not-making” (w u - w e i i)–which is
approximately what we mean by “growing.” For things made are
separate parts put together, like machines, or things fashioned from
without inwards, like sculptures. Whereas things grown divide
themselves into parts, from within outwards. Because the natural
universe works mainly according to the principles of growth, it
would seem quite odd to the Chinese mind to ask how it was made.
If the universe were made, there would of course be someone who
knows how it is made–who could explain how it was put together
bit by bit as a technician can explain in one-at-a-time words how to
assemble a machine. But a universe which grows utterly excludes
the possibility of knowing how it grows in the clumsy terms of
thought and language, so that no Taoist would dream of asking
whether the Tao knows how it produces the universe. For it
operates according to spontaneity, not according to plan. Lao-tzu
says:
The Tao’s principle is spontaneity. (25)
But spontaneity is not by any means a blind, disorderly urge, a
mere power of caprice. A philosophy restricted to the alternatives
of conventional language has no way of conceiving an intelligence
which does not work according to plan, according to a (one-at-a-time) order of thought. Yet the concrete evidence of such an
intelligence is right to hand in our own thoughtlessly organized
bodies. For the Tao does not “know” how it produces the
universe just as we do not “know” how we construct our brains. In
the words of Lao-tzu’s great successor, Chuang-tzu:
Things are produced around us, but no one knows the whence.
They issue forth, but no one sees the portal. Men one and all
value that part of knowledge which is known. They do not know
how to avail themselves of the Unknown in order to reach
knowledge. Is not this misguided?
The conventional relationship of the knower to the known is
often that of the controller to the controlled, and thus of lord to
servant. Thus whereas God is the master of the universe, since “he
knows about it all! He knows! He knows!,” the relationship of the
Tao to what it produces is quite otherwise.
The great Tao flows everywhere,
to the left and to the right.
All things depend upon it to exist,
and it does not abandon them.
To its accomplishments it lays no claim.
It loves and nourishes all things,
but does not lord it over them. (34)
In the usual Western conception God is also self-knowing–
transparent through and through to his own understanding, the
image of what man would like to be: the conscious ruler and
controller, the absolute dictator of his own mind and body. But in
contrast with this, the Tao is through and through mysterious and
dark (hsüan k). As a Zen Buddhist said of it in later times:
There is one thing: above, it supports Heaven; below, it upholds
Earth. It is black like lacquer, always actively functioning.5 l
Hsüan is, of course, a metaphorical darkness–not the darkness of
night, of black as opposed to white, but the sheer inconceivability
which confronts the mind when it tries to remember the time
before birth, or to penetrate its own depths.
Western critics often poke fun at such nebulous views of the
Absolute, deriding them as “misty and mystical” in contrast with
their own robustly definite opinions. But as Lao-tzu said:
When the superior man hears of the Tao,
he does his best to practice it.
When the middling man hears of the Tao,
he sometimes keeps it, and sometimes loses it.
When the inferior man hears of the Tao,
he will laugh aloud at it.
If he did not laugh, it would not be the Tao. (41)
For it is really impossible to appreciate what is meant by the Tao
without becoming, in a rather special sense, stupid. So long as the
conscious intellect is frantically trying to clutch the world in its net
of abstractions, and to insist that life be bound and fitted to its rigid
categories, the mood of Taoism will remain incomprehensible; and
the intellect will wear itself out. The Tao is accessible only to the
mind which can practice the simple and subtle art of wu-wei,
which, after the Tao, is the second important principle of Taoism.
We saw that the I Ching had given the Chinese mind some
experience in arriving at decisions spontaneously, decisions which
are e5ective to the degree that one knows how to let one’s mind
alone, trusting it to work by itself. This is wu-wei, since wu means
“not” or “non-” and wei means “action,” “making,” “doing,”
“striving,” “straining,” or “busyness.” To return to the illustration of
eyesight, the peripheral vision works most e5ectively–as in the
dark–when we see out of the corners of the eyes, and do not look at
things directly. Similarly, when we need to see the details of a
distant object, such as a clock, the eyes must be relaxed, not staring,
not trying to see. So, too, no amount of working with the muscles of
the mouth and tongue will enable us to taste our food more acutely.
The eyes and the tongue must be trusted to do the work by
themselves.
But when we have learned to put excessive reliance upon central
vision, upon the sharp spotlight of the eyes and mind, we cannot
regain the powers of peripheral vision unless the sharp and staring
kind of sight is .rst relaxed. The mental or psychological equivalent
of this is the special kind of stupidity to which Lao-tzu and Chuangtzu so often refer. It is not simply calmness of mind, but “nongraspingness” of mind. In Chuangtzu’s words, “The perfect man
employs his mind as a mirror. It grasps nothing; it refuses nothing.
It receives, but does not keep.” One might almost say that it
“fuzzes” itself a little to compensate for too harsh a clarity. Thus
Lao-tzu says of himself:
Cut out cleverness and there are no anxieties! …
People in general are so happy, as if enjoying a feast,
Or as going up a tower in spring.
I alone am tranquil, and have made no signs,
Like a baby who is yet unable to smile;
Forlorn as if I had no home to go to.
Others all have more than enough,
And I alone seem to be in want.
Possibly mine is the mind of a fool,
Which is so ignorant!
The vulgar are bright,
And I alone seem to be dull.
The vulgar are discriminative,
And I alone seem to be blunt.
I am negligent as if being obscure;
Drifting, as if being attached to nothing.
The people in general all have something to do,
And I alone seem to be impractical and awkward.
I alone am different from others,
But I value seeking sustenance from the Mother (Tao).
(20)
In most Taoist writings there is a slight degree of exaggeration or
overstatement of the point which is actually a kind of humor, a selfcaricature. Thus Chuang-tzu writes on the same theme:
The man of character (te) lives at home without exercising his
mind and performs actions without worry. The notions of right
and wrong and the praise and blame of others do not disturb
him. When within the four seas all people can enjoy themselves,
that is happiness for him.… Sorrowful in countenance, he looks
like a baby who has lost his mother; appearing stupid, he goes
about like one who has lost his way. He has plenty of money to
spend, but does not know where it comes from. He drinks and
eats just enough and does not know where the food comes from.
(3:13)7
Lao-tzu is still more forceful in his apparent condemnation of
conventional cleverness:
Cut out sagacity; discard knowingness,
and the people will benefit an hundredfold.
Cut out “humanity”; discard righteousness,
and the people will regain love of their fellows.
Cut out cleverness; discard the utilitarian,
and there will be no thieves and robbers.…
Become unaffected;
Cherish sincerity;
Belittle the personal;
Reduce desires. (19)
The idea is not to reduce the human mind to a moronic vacuity,
but to bring into play its innate and spontaneous intelligence by
using it without forcing it. It is fundamental to both Taoist and
Confucian thought that the natural man is to be trusted, and from
their standpoint it appears that the Western mistrust of human
nature–whether theological or technological–is a kind of
schizophrenia. It would be impossible, in their view, to believe
oneself innately evil without discrediting the very belief, since all
the notions of a perverted mind would be perverted notions.
However religiously “emancipated,” the technological mind shows
that it has inherited the same division against itself when it tries to
subject the whole human order to the control of conscious reason. It
forgets that reason cannot be trusted if the brain cannot be trusted,
since the power of reason depends upon organs that were grown by
“unconscious intelligence.”
The art of letting the mind alone is vividly described by another
Taoist writer, Lieh-tzu (c. 398 B.C.), celebrated for his mysterious
power of being able to ride upon the wind. This, no doubt, refers to
the peculiar sensation of “walking on air” which arises when the
mind is first liberated. It is said that when Professor D. T. Suzuki
was once asked how it feels to have attained satori, the Zen
experience of “awakening,” he answered, “Just like ordinary
everyday experience, except about two inches o5 the ground!” Thus
when asked to explain the art of riding on the wind, Lieh-tzu gave
the following account of his training under his master Lao Shang:
After I had served him … for the space of three years, my mind
did not venture to re1ect on right and wrong, my lips did not
venture to speak of profit and loss. Then, for the first time, my
master bestowed one glance upon me- and that was all.
At the end of five years a change had taken place; my mind
was re1ecting on right and wrong, and my lips were speaking of
pro.t and loss. Then, for the first time, my master relaxed his
countenance and smiled.
At the end of seven years, there was another change. I let my
mind re1ect on what it would, but it no longer occupied itself
with right and wrong. I let my lips utter whatsoever they pleased,
but they no longer spoke of pro.t and loss. Then, at last, my
master led me in to sit on the mat beside him.
At the end of nine years, my mind gave free rein to its
reflections,p my mouth free passage to its speech. Of right and
wrong, pro.t and loss, I had no knowledge, either as touching
myself or others.… Internal and external were blended into unity.
After that, there was no distinction between eye and ear, ear and
nose, nose and mouth: all were the same. My mind was frozen,
my body in dissolution, my flesh and bones all melted together. I
was wholly unconscious of what my body was resting on, or what
was under my feet. I was borne this way and that on the wind,
like dry cha5 or leaves falling from a tree. In fact, I knew not
whether the wind was riding on me or I on the wind.
The state of consciousness described sounds not unlike being
pleasantly drunk–though without the “morning after” e5ects of
alcohol! Chuang-tzu noticed the similarity, for he wrote:
A drunken man who falls out of a cart, though he may suffer,
does not die. His bones are the same as other people’s; but he
meets the accident in a different way. His spirit is in a condition
of security. He is not conscious of riding in the cart; neither is he
conscious of falling out of it. Ideas of life, death, fear, etc., cannot
penetrate his breast; and so he does not su5er from contact with
objective existences. And if such security is to be got from wine,
how much more is it to be got from Spontaneity. (19)
Since Lao-tzu, Chuang-tzu, and Lieh-tzu were all conscious enough
to write very intelligible books, it may be assumed that some of this
language is, again, exaggerated or metaphorical. Their
“unconsciousness” is not coma, but what the exponents of Zen later
signi.ed by wu-hsin,q literally “no-mind,” which is to say un-selfconsciousness. It is a state of wholeness in which the mind functions
freely and easily, without the sensation of a second mind or ego
standing over it with a club. If the ordinary man is one who has to
walk by lifting his legs with his hands, the Taoist is one who has
learned to let the legs walk by themselves.
Various passages in the Taoist writings suggest that “nomindedness” is employing the whole mind as we use the eyes when
we rest them upon various objects but make no special effort to
take anything in. According to Chuang-tzu:
The baby looks at things all day without winking; that is because
his eyes are not focussed on any particular object. He goes
without knowing where he is going, and stops without knowing
what he is doing. He merges himself with the surroundings and
moves along with it. These are the principles of mental hygiene.
(23)
And again:
If you regulate your body and unify your attention, the harmony
of heaven will come upon you. If you integrate your awareness,
and unify your thoughts, spirit will make its abode with you. Te
(virtue) will clothe you, and the Tao will shelter you. Your eyes
will be like those of a new-born calf, which seeks not the
wherefore. (22)
Each of the other senses might similarly be used to illustrate the
“non-active” functioning of the mind–listening without straining to
hear, smelling without strong inhalation, tasting without screwing
up the tongue, and touching without pressing the object. Each is a
special instance of the mental function which works through all,
and which Chinese designates with the peculiar word hsin.r
This term is so important for the understanding of Zen that some
attempt must be made to say what Taoism and Chinese thought in
general take it to mean. We usually translate it as “mind” or
“heart,” but neither of these words is satisfactory. The original form
of the ideograph8 seems to be a picture of the heart, or perhaps of
the lungs or the liver, and when a Chinese speaks of the hsin he
will often point to the center of his chest, slightly lower than the
heart.
The diffculty with our translations is that “mind” is too
intellectual, too cortical, and that “heart” in its current English usage
is too emotional–even sentimental. Furthermore, hsin is not always
used with quite the same sense. Sometimes it is used for an
obstruction to be removed, as in wu-hsin, “no-mind.” But
sometimes it is used in a way that is almost synonymous with the
Tao. This is especially found in Zen literature, which abounds with
such phrases as “original mind” (pen hsin t), “Buddha mind” (fu
hsin u), or “faith in mind” (hsin hsin v). This apparent contradiction
is resolved in the principle that “the true mind is no mind,” which
is to say that the hsin is true, is working properly, when it works as
if it were not present. In the same way, the eyes are seeing properly
when they do not see themselves, in terms of spots or blotches in
the air.
All in all, it would seem that hsin means the totality of our
psychic functioning, and, more speciffically, the center of that
functioning, which is associated with the central point of the upper
body. The Japanese form of the word, kokoro, is used with even
more subtleties of meaning, but for the present it is enough to
realize that in translating it “mind” (a suffciently vague word) we
do not mean exclusively the intellectual or thinking mind, nor even
the surface consciousness. The important point is that, according to
both Taoism and Zen, the center of the mind’s activity is not in the
conscious thinking process, not in the ego.
When a man has learned to let his mind alone so that it functions
in the integrated and spontaneous way that is natural to it, he
begins to show the special kind of “virtue” or “power” called te.
This is not virtue in the current sense of moral rectitude but in the
older sense of effectiveness, as when one speaks of the healing
virtues of a plant. Te is, furthermore, unaffected or spontaneous
virtue which cannot be cultivated or imitated by any deliberate
method. Lao-tzu says:
Superior te is not te,
and thus has te.
Inferior te does not let go of te,
and thus is not te.
Superior te is non-active [wu-wei] and aimless.
Inferior te is active and has an aim. (38)
The literal translation has a strength and depth which is lost in such
paraphrases as “Superior virtue is not conscious of itself as virtue,
and thus really is virtue. Inferior virtue cannot dispense with
virtuosity, and thus is not virtue.”
When the Confucians prescribed a virtue which depended upon
the arti.cial observance of rules and precepts, the Taoists pointed
out that such virtue was conventional and not genuine. Chuang-tzu
made up the following imaginary dialogue between Confucius and
Lao-tzu:
“Tell me,” said Lao-tzu, “in what consist charity and duty to one’s
neighbour?”
“They consist,” answered Confucius, “in a capacity for rejoicing
in all things; in universal love, without the element of self. These
are the characteristics of charity and duty to one’s neighbour.”
“What stu5!” cried Lao-tzu. “Does not universal love contradict
itself? Is not your elimination of self a positive manifestation of
self? Sir, if you would cause the empire not to lose its source of
nourishment,–there is the universe, its regularity is unceasing;
there are the sun and moon, their brightness is unceasing; there
are the stars, their groupings never change; there are the birds
and beasts, they 1ock together without varying; there are trees
and shrubs, they grow upwards without exception. Be like these:
follow Tao, and you will be perfect. Why then these vain
struggles after charity and duty to one’s neighbour, as though
beating a drum in search of a fugitive. Alas! Sir, you have brought
much confusion into the mind of man.” (13)
The Taoist critique of conventional virtue applied not only in the
moral sphere but also in the arts, crafts, and trades. According to
Chuang-tzu:
Ch’ui the artisan could draw circles with his hand better than
with compasses. His fingers seemed to accommodate themselves
so naturally to the thing he was working at, that it was
unnecessary to fix his attention. His mental faculties thus
remained One (i.e., integrated), and su5ered no hindrance. To be
unconscious of one’s feet implies that the shoes are easy. To be
unconscious of a waist implies that the girdle is easy. The
intelligence being unconscious of positive and negative implies
that the heart (hsin) is at ease.… And he who, beginning with
ease, is never not at ease, is unconscious of the ease of ease.
(19)14
Just as the artisan who had mastered te could do without the
artificiality of the compass, so the painter, the musician, and the
cook would have no need for the conventional classiffications of
their respective arts. Thus Lao-tzu said:
The five colours will blind a man’s sight.
The five sounds will deaden a mans hearing.
The five tastes will spoil a man’s palate.
Chasing and hunting will drive a man wild.
Things hard to get will do harm to a man’s conduct.
Therefore the sage makes provision for the stomach and
not for the eye. (12)
This must by no means be taken as an ascetic’s hatred of sense
experience, for the point is precisely that the eye’s sensitivity to
color is impaired by the fixed idea that there are just five true
colors. There is an infinite continuity of shading, and breaking it
down into divisions with names distracts the attention from its
subtlety. This is why “the sage makes provision for the stomach and
not for the eye,” which is to say that he judges by the concrete
content of the experience, and not by its conformity with purely
theoretical standards.
In sum, then, te is the unthinkable ingenuity and creative power
of man’s spontaneous and natural functioning–a power which is
blocked when one tries to master it in terms of formal methods and
techniques. It is like the centipede’s skill in using a hundred legs at
once.
The centipede was happy, quite,
Until a toad in fun
Said, “Pray, which leg goes after which?”
This worked his mind to such a pitch,
He lay distracted in a ditch,
Considering how to run.
A profound regard for te underlies the entire higher culture of the
Far East, so much so that it has been made the basic principle of
every kind of art and craft. While it is true that these arts employ
what are, to us, highly diffcult technical disciplines, it is always
recognized that they are instrumental and secondary, and that
superior work has the quality of an accident. This is not merely a
masterful mimicry of the accidental, an assumed spontaneity in
which the careful planning does not show. It lies at a much deeper
and more genuine level, for what the culture of Taoism and Zen
proposes is that one might become the kind of person who, without
intending it, is a source of marvelous accidents.
Taoism is, then, the original Chinese way of liberation which
combined with Indian Mahayana Buddhism to produce Zen. It is a
liberation from convention and of the creative power of te. Every
attempt to describe and formulate it in words and one-at-a-time
thought symbols must, of necessity, distort it. The foregoing chapter
has perforce made it seem one of the “vitalist” or “naturalistic”
philosophical alternatives. For Western philosophers are constantly
bedeviled by the discovery that they cannot think outside certain
well-worn ruts–that, however hard they may try, their “new”
philosophies turn out to be restatements of ancient positions,
monist or pluralist, realist or nominalist, vitalist or mechanist. This
is because these are the only alternatives which the conventions of
thought can present, and they cannot discuss anything else without
presenting it in their own terms. When we try to represent a third
dimension upon a two-dimensional surface, it will of necessity
seem to belong more or less to the two alternatives of length and
breadth. In the words of Chuang-tzu:
Were language adequate, it would take but a day fully to set forth
Tao. Not being adequate, it takes that time to explain material
existences. Tao is something beyond material existences. It cannot
be conveyed either by words or by silence. (25)
1 Modern scholarship has questioned both the date and the historicity of Lao-tzu, but it
is hard to say whether this is really more than a manifestation of fashion, since there
are periodic tendencies to cast doubts on the existence of great sages or to question the
hoariness of their antiquity. One recalls similar doubts in connection with Jesus and
the Buddha. There are some serious arguments for a later date, but it seems best to keep
the traditional date until evidence to the contrary becomes more conclusive. See Fung
Yu-lan (1), vol. 1, pp. 170–76.
2 Fung Yu-lan (1), vol. 1, pp. 379–80.
3 Duyvendak (1) suggests that tao did not have the meaning of “to speak” at this date,
and so translates the passage, “The Way that may truly be regarded as the Way is other
than a permanent way.” It really comes to the same thing, for what Duyvendak means by
a “permanent way” is a .xed concept of the Tao–i.e., a de.nition. Almost every other
translator, and most of the Chinese commentators, take the second tao to mean
“spoken.”
3a The above was written before I had seen the second volume of Joseph Needham’s
masterly Science and Civilization in China, where he discusses the organismic nature of
the Chinese, and especially the Taoist, conception of the universe. See especially
Section 13f, pp. 279 5. Needham also draws attention to the essential di5erences
between Hebrew-Christian and Chinese views of natural law, the former deriving from
the “word” of a lawgiver, God, and the latter from a relationship of spontaneous
processes working in an organismic pattern. See Section 18, f and h, esp. pp. 557–64
and 572–83
4 H. A. Giles (1), p. 345.
5 T’ung-shan Liang-chieh. Dumoulin and Sasaki (1), p. 74.
6 Save for the first line, I have followed Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 30.
7 Lin Yutang (1), p. 129.
8 “Una5ected” is an attempt to render su,m a character which refers originally to
unbleached silk, or to the unpainted silk background of a picture. “Humanity” refers to
the central Confucian principle of jen,n which would ordinarily mean “humanheartedness,” though it is obvious that Lao-tzu refers to its self-conscious and a5ected
form.
9 L. Giles (1), pp. 40–42. From Lieh-tzu, ii.
10H. A. Giles (1), p. 232.
11 Lin Yutang (1), p. 86.
12 The central Zen principle of “no-mind” or wu-hsin is already found in Chuang-tzu.
Cf. Chuang-tzu (22):
Body like dry bone,
Mind like dead ashes;
This is true knowledge,
Not to strive after knowing the whence.
In darkness, in obscurity,
The mindless (wu-hsin) cannot plan;–
What manner of man is that?
H. A. Giles (1), p. 281.
13 H. A. Giles (1), p. 167.
14 H. A. Giles (1), p. 242.
15 Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 22.
16 H. A. Giles (1), p. 351.
Two
THE ORIGINS OF BUDDHISM
Chinese civilization was at least two thousand years old when it
"rst encountered Buddhism. Thus the new philosophy entered into
a solidly established culture in which it could hardly become
acceptable without major adaptations to the Chinese mentality,
even though there were some resemblances between Taoism and
Buddhism so strong that they have aroused speculation as to
whether contacts between the two were much earlier than has been
supposed. China absorbed Buddhism as it has absorbed so many
other external influences–not only philosophies and ideas, but also
alien populations and invaders. Undoubtedly this is due in some
measure to the extraordinary stability and maturity which the
Chinese have derived from Confucianism. Reasonable, unfanatical,
humanistic, Confucianism is one of the most workable patterns of
social convention that the world has known. Coupled with the “let
well enough alone” attitude of Taoism, it nurtured a mellow and
rather easygoing type of mentality which, when it absorbed
Buddhism, did much to make it more “practical.” That is to say, it
made Buddhism a possible way of life for human beings, for people
with families, with everyday work to do, and with normal instincts
and passions.
It was a basic Confucian principle that “it is man who makes
truth great, not truth which makes man great.” For this reason,
“humanness” or “human-heartedness” (jen a) was always felt to be
superior to “righteousness” (i b), since man himself is greater than
any idea which he may invent. There are times when men’s
passions are much more trustworthy than their principles. Since
opposed principles, or ideologies, are irreconcilable, wars fought
over principle will be wars of mutual annihilation. But wars fought
for simple greed will be far less destructive, because the aggressor
will be careful not to destroy what he is "ghting to capture.
Reasonable–that is, human–men will always be capable of
compromise, but men who have dehumanized themselves by
becoming the blind worshipers of an idea or an ideal are fanatics
whose devotion to abstractions makes them the enemies of life.
Modi"ed by such attitudes, Far Eastern Buddhism is much more
palatable and “according to nature” than its Indian and Tibetan
counterparts, with ideals of life which seem at times to be
superhuman, more suited to angels than to men. Even so, all forms
of Buddhism subscribe to the Middle Way between the extremes of
angel (deva) and demon (preta), ascetic and sensualist, and claim
that supreme “awakening” or Buddhahood can be attained only
from the human state.
There are some serious di6culties in the way of giving an
historically accurate account of Indian Buddhism, as of the whole
philosophical tradition from which it arose. No student of Asian
thought should be unaware of these difficulties, because they make
it necessary to take almost every important pronouncement about
ancient Indian thought with caution. Thus before attempting to
describe Indian Buddhism, some of these difficulties should be
mentioned.
The first, and most serious, is the problem of interpreting the
Sanskrit and Pali texts in which ancient Indian literature is
preserved. This is especially true of Sanskrit, the sacred language of
India, and more particularly the form of Sanskrit used in the Vedic
period. Both Western and Indian scholars are uncertain as to its
exact interpretation, and all modern dictionaries rely heavily on a
single source–the lexicon compiled by Böthlingk and Roth in the
latter part of the last century, and now admitted to contain a great
deal of guesswork. This seriously affects our understanding of the
primary sources of Hinduism–the Vedas and Upanishads. The
discovery of proper European equivalents for philosophical terms
has been hindered by the fact that early lexicographers were all too
ready to "nd correspondences with Western theological terms, since
one of the primary objects of their studies was to assist the
missionaries.
The second is that it is extremely hard to know what was the
original form of Buddhism. There are two sets of Buddhist
scriptures: the Pali Canon of the Theravada or Southern School of
Buddhism, which flourishes in Ceylon, Burma, and Thailand, and
the Sanskrit-Tibetan-Chinese Canon of the Mahayana, or Northern
School. There is a general consensus of scholars that the Pali Canon
is, on the whole, the earlier of the two, and that the principal sutras
(as the sacred texts are called) of the Mahayana Canon were all
compiled after 100 B.C. However, the literary form of the Pali
Canon does not suggest that it represents the actual words of
Gautama the Buddha. If the Upanishads are characteristic of the
style of discourse of an Indian teacher between 800 and 300 B.C.,
they bear little resemblance to the tediously repetitious and
scholastic style of most Buddhist scriptures. There can be little
doubt that the greater part of both Buddhist Canons is the work of
the pandits of the Sangha, the Buddhist monastic order, for it shows
every sign of being the reverential elaboration of an original
doctrine. As with Russian icons, the original painting has been
almost lost to sight in the overlay of jewels and gold.
The third is that the Hindu-Buddhist tradition has never had the
historical sense of the Hebrew-Christian tradition, so that there are
few, if any, marks to indicate the date of a given text. Scriptures
were handed down by oral tradition for an indeterminable period
of time before being committed to writing, and it is quite possible
that historical references could have been changed to suit the times
as the oral form was handed down. Furthermore, a Buddhist monk
writing in A.D. 200 would have no compunction in attributing his
own words to the Buddha if he felt sincerely that they were an
expression, not of personal opinion, but of the supra-personal state
of awakening to which he had attained. He would attribute the
words to the Buddha as speaking in a spiritual rather than material
body.
The danger of scholarship is always that, in extreme
specialization, it may be unable to see the forest for the trees. But
the problem of gaining some idea of the thought of India at the
time of the Buddha, six centuries before Christ, is not to be solved
by careful piece-work alone–necessary as this may be. There is,
however, enough reliable information to suggest the grand and
beautifully ordered form of Upanishadic Hinduism if we do not
read it with our noses against the page.
Fundamental to the life and thought of India from the very
earliest times is the great mythological theme of atma-yajna–the act
of “self-sacrifice” whereby God gives birth to the world, and
whereby men, following the divine pattern, reintegrate themselves
with God. The act by which the world is created is the same act by
which it is consummated–the giving up of one’s life–as if the whole
process of the universe were the type of game in which it is
necessary to pass on the ball as soon as it is received. Thus the basic
myth of Hinduism is that the world is God playing hide-and-seek
with himself. As Prajapati, Vishnu, or Brahma, the Lord under many
names creates the world by an act of self-dismemberment or selfforgetting, whereby the One becomes Many, and the single Actor
plays innumerable parts. In the end, he comes again to himself only
to begin the play once more–the One dying into the Many, and the
Many dying into the One.
A thousand heads hath Purusha, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet.
On every side pervading earth he fills a space ten fingers wide.
This Purusha is all that yet hath been and all that is to be;
The lord of immortality that waxes greater still by food.
So mighty is his greatness; yea, greater than this is Purusha.
All creatures are one fourth of him, three-fourths eternal life in
heaven.…
When the gods prepared the sacri"ce with Purusha as their
offering,
Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn; summer was the
wood.
From that great general sacri"ce the dripping fat was gathered
up.
He formed the creatures -of the air, and animals both wild and
tame.…
When they divided Purusha, how many portions did they make?
What do they call his mouth, his arms? What do they call his
thighs and feet?
The Brahman (caste) was his mouth, of both his arms was the
Rajanya (Kshatriya caste) made.
His thighs became Vaishya, from his feet the Shudra was
produced.
The moon was gendered from his mind, and from his eye the sun
had birth;
Indra and Agni from his mouth were born, and Vayu from his
breath.
Forth from his navel came mid-air; the sky was fashioned from
his head;
Earth from his feet, and from his ear the regions. Thus they
formed the worlds.2
The thousand heads, eyes, and feet of the Purusha are the
members of men and other beings, for the point is that That which
knows in and through every individual is God himself, the atman or
Self of the world. Every life is a part or role in which the mind of
God is absorbed, somewhat as an actor absorbs himself in being
Hamlet and forgets that in real life he is Mr. Smith. By the act of
self-abandonment God becomes all beings, yet at the same time
does not cease to be God. “All creatures are one fourth of him,
three-fourths eternal life in heaven.” For God is divided in play, in
make-believe, but remains undivided in reality. So that when the
play comes to an end, the individualized consciousness awakes to
find itself divine.
In the beginning this world was Atman (the Self), alone in the
form of Purusha. Looking about he saw nothing other than
himself.
He said "rst, “I am.” Thence came the word “I.” Thus even now,
when one is spoken to, he "rst answers simply, “It is I,” and then
tells whatever name he has.3
On all sides That has hands and feet;
On all sides eyes, heads, and faces;
On all sides in the world it hears;
All things it embraces.
It is important to remember that this picture of the world as the
play (lila) of God is mythological in form. If, at this stage, we were
to translate it directly into philosophical statement it would be a
crude type of pantheism, with which Hindu philosophy is generally
and erroneously confused. Thus the idea of each man, each thing, as
a part which the Purusha plays in the state of self-forgetting must
not be confused with a logical or scienti"c statement of fact. The
form of statement is poetic, not logical. In the words of the
Mundaka Upanishad,
Truly this atman (Self)–the poets say–travels on this earth from
body to body. (ii. 7)
Hindu philosophy has not made the mistake of imagining that one
can make an informative, factual, and positive statement about the
ultimate reality. As the same Upanishad says,
Where knowledge is without duality, without action, cause, or
e;ect, unspeakable, incomparable, beyond description, what is
that? It is impossible to say! (vi. 7)
Every positive statement about ultimate things must be made in the
suggestive form of myth, of poetry. For in this realm the direct and
indicative form of speech can say only “Neti, neti” (“No, no”), since
what can be described and categorized must always belong to the
conventional realm.
conventional realm.
Hindu mythology elaborates the theme of the divine play on a
fabulous scale, embracing not only colossal concepts of time and
space, but also the widest extremes of pleasure and pain, virtue and
depravity. The inmost Self of saint and sage is no less the veiled
Godhead than the inmost Self of the debauchee, the coward, the
lunatic, and the very demons. The opposites (dvandva) of light and
darkness, good and evil, pleasure and pain, are the essential
elements of the game, for although the Godhead is identi"ed with
Truth (sat), Consciousness (chit), and Bliss (ananda), the dark side
of life has its integral part in the game just as every drama must
have its villain, to disrupt the status quo, and as the cards must be
shuKed, thrown into chaos, in order that there may be a signi"cant
development of the play. For Hindu thought there is no Problem of
Evil. The conventional, relative world is necessarily a world of
opposites. Light is inconceivable apart from darkness; order is
meaningless without disorder; and, likewise, up without down,
sound without silence, pleasure without pain. In the words of
Ananda Coomaraswamy:
For anyone who holds that “God made the world,” the question,
Why did He permit the existence in it of any evil, or of that Evil
One in whom all evil is personi"ed, is altogether meaningless;
one might as well enquire why He did not make a world without
dimensions or one without temporal succession.
According to the myth, the divine play goes on through endless
cycles of time, through periods of manifestation and withdrawal of
the worlds measured in units of kalpas, the kalpa being a span of
4,320,000,000 years. From the human standpoint such a conception
presents a terrifying monotony, since it goes on aimlessly for ever
and ever. But from the divine standpoint it has all the fascination of
the repetitious games of children, which go on and on because time
has been forgotten and has reduced itself to a single wondrous
instant.
The foregoing myth is not the expression of a formal philosophy,
but of an experience or state of consciousness which is called
moksha or “liberation.” On the whole it is safer to say that Indian
philosophy is primarily this experience; it is only quite secondarily
a system of ideas which attempt to translate the experience into
conventional language. At root, then, the philosophy becomes
intelligible only by sharing the experience which consists of the
same type of nonconventional knowledge found in Taoism. It is
also termed atma-jnana (Self-knowledge) or atma-bodha (Selfawakening), since it may be considered as the discovery of who or
what I am, when I am no longer identi"ed with any role or
conventional de"nition of the person. Indian philosophy does not
describe the content of this discovery except in mythological terms,
using the phrase “I am Brahman” (aham brahman) or “That art
thou” (tat tvam asi) to suggest that Self-knowledge is a realization
of one’s original identity with God.
But this does not imply what “claiming to be God” means in a
Hebrew-Christian context, where mythical language is ordinarily
confused with factual language so that there is no clear distinction
between God as described in the terms of conventional thought and
God as he is in reality. A Hindu does not say “I am Brahman” with
the implication that he is personally in charge of the whole
universe and informed as to every detail of its operation. On the
one hand, he is not speaking of identity with God at the level of his
super"cial personality. On the other, his “God”–Brahman–is not in
charge of the universe in a “personal” way; he does not know and
act in the manner of a person since he does not know the universe
in terms of conventional facts nor act upon it by means of
deliberation, e;ort, and will. It may be of signi"cance that the word
“Brahman” is from the root brih-, “to grow,” since his creative
activity, like that of the Tao, is with the spontaneity proper to
growth as distinct from the deliberation proper to making.
Furthermore, though Brahman is said to “know” himself, this
knowing is not a matter of information, a knowledge such as one
has of objects distinct from a subject. In the words of Shankara,
For He is the Knower, and the Knower can know other things, but
cannot make Himself the object of His own knowledge, in the
same way that fire can burn other things, but cannot burn itself.
To the Western mind the puzzle of Indian philosophy is that it
has so much to say about what the moksha experience is not, and
little, or nothing, to say about what it is. This is naturally
bewildering, for if the experience is really without content, or if it
is so lacking in relation to the things which we consider important,
how is one to explain the immense esteem which it holds in the
Indian scheme of life?
Even at the conventional level it is surely easy to see that
knowing what is not so is often quite as important as knowing what
is. Even when medicine can suggest no effective remedy for the
common cold, there is some advantage in knowing the uselessness
of certain popular nostrums. Furthermore, the function of negative
knowledge is not unlike the uses of space–the empty page upon
which words can be written, the empty jar into which liquid can be
poured, the empty window through which light can be admitted,
and the empty pipe through which water can flow. Obviously the
value of emptiness lies in the movements it permits or in the
substance which it mediates and contains. But the emptiness must
come "rst. This is why Indian philosophy concentrates on negation,
on liberating the mind from concepts of Truth. It proposes no idea,
no description, of what is to fill the mind’s void because the idea
would exclude the fact–somewhat as a picture of the sun on the
windowpane would shut out the true sun’s light. Whereas the
Hebrews would not permit an image of God in wood or stone, the
Hindus will not permit an image of thought–unless it be so
obviously mythological as not to be mistaken for the reality.
Therefore the practical discipline (sadhana) of the way of
liberation is a progressive disentanglement of one’s Self (atman)
from every identification. It is to realize that I am not this body,
these sensations, these feelings, these thoughts, this consciousness.
The basic reality of my life is not any conceivable object.
Ultimately it is not even to be identified with any idea, as of God or
atman. In the words of the Mandukya Upanishad:
(It is) That which is conscious neither of the subjective nor of the
objective, nor of both; which is neither simple consciousness, nor
undi;erentiated sentience, nor mere darkness. It is unseen,
without relations, incomprehensible, uninferable, and
indescribable–the essence of Self-consciousness, the ending of
maya. (vii)
The atman is to our total consciousness what the head is to the
sense of sight–neither light nor darkness, neither full nor empty,
only an inconceivable beyond. In the moment when every last
identi"cation of the Self with some object or concept has ceased, in
the state called nirvikalpa or “without conception,” there flashes
forth from its unknown depths the state of consciousness which is
called divine, the knowledge of Brahman.
Translated into conventional and—let it be repeated—
mythopoetic language, the knowledge of Brahman is represented as
the discovery that this world which seemed to be Many is in truth
One, that “all is Brahman” and that “all duality is falsely imagined.”
Taken as statements of fact, such utterances are logically
meaningless and convey no information. Yet they seem to be the
best possible expression in words of the experience itself, though it
is as if in the moment of saying the “last word” the tongue were
paralyzed by its own revelation, and compelled to babble nonsense
or be silent.
Moksha is also understood as liberation from maya–one of the
most important words in Indian philosophy, both Hindu and
Buddhist. For the manifold world of facts and events is said to be
maya, ordinarily understood as an illusion which veils the one
underlying reality of Brahman. This gives the impression that
moksha is a state of consciousness in which the whole varied world
of nature vanishes from sight, merged in a boundless ocean of
vaguely luminous space. Such an impression should be dismissed at
once, for it implies a duality, an incompatibility, between Brahman
and maya which is against the whole principle of Upanishadic
philosophy. For Brahman is not One as opposed to Many, not
simp le as opposed to complex. Brahman is without dualit
(advaita), which is to say without any opposite since Brahman is
not in any class or, for that matter, outside any class.
Now classi"cation is precisely maya. The word is derived from
the Sanskrit root matr-, “to measure, form, build, or lay out a plan,”
the root from which we obtain such Greco-Latin words as meter,
matrix, material, and matter. The fundamental process of
measurement is division, whether by drawing a line with the "nger,
by marking o; or by enclosing circles with the span of the hand or
dividers, or by sorting grain or liquids into measures (cups). Thus
the Sanskrit root dva- from which we get the word “divide” is also
the root of the Latin duo (two) and the English “dual.”
To say, then, that the world of facts and events is maya is to say
that facts and events are terms of measurement rather than realities
of nature. We must, however, expand the concept of measurement
to include setting bounds of all kinds, whether by descriptive
classi"cation or selective screening. It will thus be easy to see that
facts and events are as abstract as lines of latitude or as feet and
inches. Consider for a moment that it is impossible to isolate a
single fact, all by itself. Facts come in pairs at the very least, for a
single body is inconceivable apart from a space in which it hangs.
De"nition, setting bounds, delineation–these are always acts of
division and thus of duality, for as soon as a boundary is de"ned it
has two sides.
This point of view is somewhat startling, and even quite hard to
understand, for those long accustomed to think that things, facts,
and events are the very building-blocks of the world, the most solid
of solid realities. Yet a proper understanding of the maya doctrine
is one of the most essential prerequisites for the study of Hinduism
and Buddhism, and in trying to grasp its meaning one must try to
put aside the various “idealist” philosophies of the West with which
it is so often confused–even by modern Indian Vedantists. For the
world is not an illusion of the mind in the sense that–to the eyes of
the liberated man (jivanmukta)–there is nothing to be seen but a
trackless void. He sees the world that we see; but he does not mark
it o;, measure it, divide it in the same way. He does not look upon
it as really or concretely broken down into separate things and
it as really or concretely broken down into separate things and
events. He sees that the skin may just as well be regarded as what
joins us to our environment as what separates us from it. He sees,
furthermore, that the skin will be considered as joining only if it
has first been considered as separating, or vice versa.
Thus his point of view is not monistic. He does not think that all
things are in reality One because, concretely speaking, there never
were any “things” to be considered One. To join is as much maya as
to separate. For this reason both Hindus and Buddhists prefer to
speak of reality as “nondual” rather than “one,” since the concept of
one must always be in relation to that of many. The doctrine of
maya is therefore a doctrine of relativity. It is saying that things,
facts, and events are delineated, not by nature, but by human
description, and that the way in which we describe (or divide) them
is relative to our varying points of view.
It is easy to see, for example, that an event called the First World
War can only rather arbitrarily be said to have begun on August 4,
1914, and to have ended on November 11, 1918. Historians can
discover “actual” beginnings of the war long before and
“resumptions” of the same strife long after these formal boundaries
of the event. For events can divide and merge like blobs of mercury
according to the changing fashions of historical description. The
boundaries of events are conventional rather than natural, in the
sense that a man’s life is said to have begun at the moment of
parturition, rather than at conception on the one hand or weaning
on the other.
Similarly, it is easy to see the conventional character of things.
Ordinarily a human organism is counted as one thing, though from
the physiological standpoint it is as many things as it has parts or
organs, and from the sociological standpoint it is merely part of a
larger thing called a group.
Certainly the world of nature abounds with surfaces and lines,
with areas of density and vacuity, which we employ in marking out
the boundaries of events and things. But here again, the maya
doctrine asserts that these forms (rupa) have no “own-being” or
“self-nature” (svabhava): they do not exist in their own right, but
only in relation to one another, as a solid cannot be distinguished
save in relation to a space. In this sense, the solid and the space, the
sound and the silence, the existent and the nonexistent, the "gure
and the ground are inseparable, interdependent, or “mutually
arising,” and it is only by maya or conventional division that they
may be considered apart from one another.
Indian philosophy also thinks of rupa or form as maya because it
is impermanent. Indeed, when Hindu and Buddhist texts speak of
the “empty” or “illusory” character of the visible world of nature–as
distinct from the conventional world of things–they refer precisely
to the impermanence of its forms. Form is flux, and thus maya in
the slightly extended sense that it cannot be firmly marked down or
grasped. Form is maya when the mind attempts to comprehend and
control it in the fixed categories of thought, that is, by means of
names (nama) and words. For these are precisely the nouns and
verbs by means of which the abstract and conceptual categories of
things and events are designated.
To serve their purpose, names and terms must of necessity be
fixed and definite like all other units of measurement. But their use
is–up to a point–so satisfactory that man is always in danger of
confusing his measures with the world so measured, of identifying
money with wealth, fixed convention with fluid reality. But to the
degree that he identifies himself and his life with these rigid and
hollow frames of definition, he condemns himself to the perpetual
frustration of one trying to catch water in a sieve. Thus Indian
philosophy speaks constantly of the unwisdom of pursuing things,
of striving for the permanence of particular entities and events,
because it sees in all this nothing more than an infatuation with
ghosts, with the abstract measures of the mind (manas).
Maya is, then, usually equated with nama-rupa or “name-and-form,” with the mind’s attempt to grasp the fluid forms of nature in
its mesh of "xed classes. But when it is understood that form is
ultimately void-in the special sense of ungraspable and
immeasurable-the world of form is immediately seen as Brahman
rather than maya. The formal world becomes the real world in the
moment when it is no longer clutched, in the moment when its
changeful fluidity is no longer resisted. Hence it is the very
transitoriness of the world which is the sign of its divinity, of its
actual identity with the indivisible and immeasurable infinity of
Brahman.
This is why the Hindu-Buddhist insistence on the impermanence
of the world is not the pessimistic and nihilistic doctrine which
Western critics normally suppose it to be. Transitoriness is
depressing only to the mind which insists upon trying to grasp. But
to the mind which lets go and moves with the flow of change,
which becomes, in Zen Buddhist imagery, like a ball in a mountain
stream, the sense of transience or emptiness becomes a kind of
ecstasy. This is perhaps why, in both East and West, impermanence
is so often the theme of the most profound and moving poetry-so
much so that the splendor of change shines through even when the
poet seems to resent it the most.
Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
To the last syllable of recorded time,
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
And then is heard no more: it is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.
Stated thus—as R. H. Blyth observes—it seems not so bad after all.
In sum, then, the maya doctrine points out, firstly, the
impossibility of grasping the actual world in the mind’s net of
words and concepts, and, secondly, the fluid character of those very
forms which thought attempts to de"ne. The world of facts and
events is altogether nama, abstract names, and rupa, fluid form. It
escapes both the comprehension of the philosopher and the grasp
of the pleasure-seeker like water from a clutching first. There is even
something deceptive in the idea of Brahman as the eternal reality
underlying the flux, and of the atman as the divine ground of
human consciousness, for in so far as these are concepts they are as
incapable of grasping the real as any other.
It is precisely this realization of the total elusiveness of the world
which lies at the root of Buddhism. This is the special shift of
emphasis which, more than anything else, distinguishes the doctrine
of the Buddha from the teaching of the Upanishads, which is the
raison d’être for the growth of Buddhism as a distinct movement in
Indian life and thought.
For Gautama the “Awakened One” or Buddha (died c. 545 B.C.)
lived at a time when the major Upanishads were already in
existence, and their philosophy must be seen as the point of
departure for his own teaching. It would be a serious mistake,
however, to look upon the Buddha as the “founder” or “reformer”
of a religion which came into being as some kind of organized
revolt against Hinduism. For we are speaking of a time when there
was no consciousness of “religions,” when such terms as “Hinduism” or “Brahman-ism” would have meant nothing. There was
simply a tradition, embodied in the orally transmitted doctrine! of
the Vedas and Upanishads, a tradition that was not speci"cally
“religious” in that it involved a whole way of life and concerned
everything from the methods of agriculture to the knowledge of the
ultimate reality. The Buddha was acting in full accord with this
tradition when he became a rishi or “forest sage,” who had
abandoned the life of the householder and divested himself of caste
in order to follow a way of liberation. As with every other rishi, the
method of his way of liberation had certain characteristic features,
and his doctrine contained criticisms of men’s failure to practice the
tradition which they professed.
Furthermore, he was being entirely traditional in his
abandonment of caste and in accepting a following of casteless and
homeless students. For the Indian tradition, even more than the
Chinese, specifically encourages the abandonment of the
conventional life at a certain age, after the duties of family and
citizenship have been fulfilled. Relinquishment of caste is the
outward and visible sign of the realization that one’s true state is
“unclassified,” that one’s role or person is simply conventional, and
that one’s true nature is “no-thing” and “no-body.”
This realization was the crux of the Buddha’s experience of
awakening (bodhi) which dawned upon him one night, as he sat
under the celebrated Bo Tree at Gaya, after seven years of
meditation in the forests. From the standpoint of Zen, this
experience is the essential content of Buddhism, and the verbal
doctrine is quite secondary to the wordless transmission of the
experience itself from generation to generation. For seven years
Gautama had struggled by the traditional means of yoga and tapas,
contemplation and ascesis, to penetrate the cause of man’s
enslavement to maya, to find release from the vicious circle of
clinging-to-life (trishna) which is like trying to make the hand grasp
itself. All his e;orts had been in vain. The eternal atman, the real
Self, was not to be found. However much he concentrated upon his
own mind to "nd its root and ground, he found only his own e;ort
to concentrate. The evening before his awakening he simply “gave
up,” relaxed his ascetic diet, and ate some nourishing food.
Thereupon he felt at once that a profound change was coming
over him. He sat beneath the tree, vowing never to rise until he had
attained the supreme awakening, and-according to a tradition-sat all
through the night until the first glimpse of the morning star
suddenly provoked a state of perfect clarity and understanding. This
was anuttara samyak sambodhi, “unexcelled, complete awakening,”
liberation from maya and from the everlasting Round of birth-anddeath (samsara), which goes on and on for as long as a man tries in
any way whatsoever to grasp at his own life.
Yet the actual content of this experience was never and could
never be put into words. For words are the frames of maya, the
meshes of its net, and the experience is of the water which slips
through. Thus so far as words are concerned the most that may be
said of this experience are the words attributed to the Buddha in
the Vajracchedika:
Just so, Subhuti, I obtained not the least thing from unexcelled,
complete awakening, and for this very reason it is called
“unexcelled, complete awakening.” (22)
Thus from the standpoint of Zen the Buddha “never said a word,”
despite the volumes of scriptures attributed to him. For his real
message remained always unspoken, and was such that, when
words attempted to express it, they made it seem as if it were
nothing at all. Yet it is the essential tradition of Zen that what
cannot be conveyed by speech can nevertheless be passed on by
“direct pointing,” by some nonverbal means of communication
without which the Buddhist experience could never have been
handed down to future generations.
In its own (probably rather late) tradition, Zen maintains that the
Buddha transmitted awakening to his chief disciple, Mahakasyapa,
by holding up a flower and remaining silent. The Pali Canon,
however, relates that immediately after his awakening the Buddha
went to the Deer Park at Benares, and set forth his doctrine to those
who had formerly been his companions in the ascetic life,
expressing it in the form of those Four Noble Truths which provide
so convenient a summary of Buddhism.
These Four Truths are patterned on the traditional Vedic form of
a physician’s diagnosis and prescription: the identi"cation of the
disease, and of its cause, the pronouncement as to whether it may
be cured, and the prescription for the remedy.
The First Truth is concerned with the problematic word duhkha,
loosely translatable as “suffering,” and which designates the great
disease of the world for which the Buddha’s method (dharma) is the
cure.
Birth is duhkha, decay is duhkha, sickness is duhkha, death is
duhkha, so also are sorrow and grief.… To be bound with things
which we dislike, and to be parted from things which we like,
these also are duhkha. Not to get what one desires, this also is
duhkha. In a word, this body, this fivefold aggregation based on
clutching (trishna), this is duhkha.8
This, however, cannot quite be compressed into the sweeping
assertion that “life is suffering.” The point is rather that life as we
usually live it is suffering-or, more exactly, is bedeviled by the
peculiar frustration which comes from attempting the impossible.
Perhaps, then, “frustration” is the best equivalent for duhkha, even
though the word is the simple antonym of sukha, which means
“pleasant” or “sweet.”
In another formulation of the Buddha’s teaching duhkha is one of
the three characteristics of being, or becoming (bhava), whereof the
other two are anitya, impermanence, and anatman, absence of any
Self. These two terms are of basic importance. The anitya doctrine
is, again, not quite the simple assertion that the world is
impermanent, but rather that the more one grasps at the world, the
more it changes. Reality in itself is neither permanent nor
impermanent; it cannot be categorized. But when one tries to hold
on to it, change is everywhere apparent, since, like one’s own
shadow, the faster one pursues it, the faster it flees.
In the same way, the anatman doctrine is not quite the bald
assertion that there is no real Self (atman) at the basis of our
consciousness. The point is rather that there is no Self, or basic
reality, which may be grasped, either by direct experience or by
concepts. Apparently the Buddha felt that the doctrine of the atman
in the Upanishads lent itself too easily to a fatal misinterpretation.
It became an object of belief, a desideratum, a goal to be reached,
something to which the mind could cling as its one "nal abode of
safety in the flux of life. The Buddha’s view was that a Self so
grasped was no longer the true Self, but only one more of the
innumerable forms of maya. Thus anatman might be expressed in
the form, “The true Self is non-Self,” since any attempt to conceive
the Self, believe in the Self, or seek for the Self immediately thrusts
it away.
The Upanishads distinguish between atman, the true, supraindividual Self, and the jivatman or individual soul, and the
Buddha’s anatman doctrine agrees with them in denying the reality
of the latter. It is fundamental to every school of Buddhism that
there is no ego, no enduring entity which is the constant subject of
our changing experiences. For the ego exists in an abstract sense
alone, being an abstraction from memory, somewhat like the
illusory circle of "re made by a whirling torch. We can, for
example, imagine the path of a bird through the sky as a distinct
line which it has taken. But this line is as abstract as a line of
latitude. In concrete reality, the bird left no line, and, similarly, the
past from which our ego is abstracted has entirely disappeared.
Thus any attempt to cling to the ego or to make it an e;ective
source of action is doomed to frustration.
The Second Noble Truth relates to the cause of frustration, which
is said to be trishna, clinging or grasping, based on avidya, which is
ignorance or unconsciousness. Now avidya is the formal opposite of
awakening. It is the state of the mind when hypnotized or
spellbound by maya, so that it mistakes the abstract world of things
and events for the concrete world of reality. At a still deeper level it
is lack of self-knowledge, lack of the realization that all grasping
turns out to be the futile e;ort to grasp oneself, or rather, to make
life catch hold of itself. For to one who has self-knowledge, there is
no duality between himself and the external world. Avidya is
“ignoring” the fact that subject and object are relational, like the
two sides of a coin, so that when one pursues, the other retreats.
This is why the egocentric attempt to dominate the world, to bring
as much of the world as possible under the control of the ego, has
only to proceed for a little while before it raises the di6culty of the
ego’s controlling itself.
This is really a simple problem of what we now call cybernetics,
the science of control. Mechanically and logically it is easy to see
that any system approaching perfect self-control is also approaching
perfect self-frustration. Such a system is a vicious circle, and has the
same logical structure as a statement which states something about
itself, as for example, “I am lying,” when it is implied that the
statement is itself a lie. The statement circulates fatuously forever,
since it is always true to the extent that it is false, and false to the
extent that it is true. Expressed more concretely, I cannot throw a
ball so long as I am holding on to it–so as to maintain perfect
control of its movement.
Thus the desire for perfect control, of the environment and of
oneself, is based on a profound mistrust of the controller. Avidya is
the failure to see the basic self-contradiction of this position. From
it therefore arises a futile grasping or controlling of life which is
pure self-frustration, and the pattern of life which follows is the
vicious circle which in Hinduism and Buddhism is called samsara,
the Round of birth-and-death.
The active principle of the Round is known as karma or
“conditioned action,” action, that is, arising from a motive and
seeking a result-the type of action which always requires the
necessity for further action. Man is involved in karma when he
interferes with the world in such a way that he is compelled to go
on interfering, when the solution of a problem creates still more
problems to be solved, when the control of one thing creates the
need to control several others. Karma is thus the fate of everyone
who “tries to be God.” He lays a trap for the world in which he
himself gets caught.
Many Buddhists understand the Round of birth-and-death quite
literally as a process of reincarnation, wherein the karma which
shapes the individual does so again and again in life after life until,
through insight and awakening, it is laid to rest. But in Zen, and in
other schools of the Mahayana, it is often taken in a more "gurative
way, as that the process of rebirth is from moment to moment, so
that one is being reborn so long as one identifies himself with a
continuing ego which reincarnates itself afresh at each moment of
time. Thus the validity and interest of the doctrine does not require
acceptance of a special theory of survival. Its importance is rather
that it exempli"es the whole problem of action in vicious circles
and its resolution, and in this respect Buddhist philosophy should
have a special interest for students of communication theory,
cybernetics, logical philosophy, and similar matters.
The Third Noble Truth is concerned with the ending of selffrustration, of grasping, and of the whole viciously circular pattern
of karma which generates the Round. The ending is called nirvana,
a word of such dubious etymology that a simple translation is
exceedingly di6cult. It has been variously connected with Sanskrit
roots which would make it mean the blowing out of a flame, or
simply blowing out (ex- or de-spiration), or with the cessation of
waves, turnings, or circlings (vritti) of the mind.
The two latter interpretations seem, on the whole, to make most
sense. If nirvana is “de-spiration” it is the act of one who has seen
the futility of trying to hold his breath or life (prana) indefinitely,
since to hold the breath is to lose it. Thus nirvana is the equivalent
of moksha, release or liberation. Seen from one side, it appears to
be despair-the recognition that life utterly defeats our efforts to
control it, that all human striving is no more than a vanishing hand
clutching at clouds. Seen from the other side, this despair bursts into
joy and creative power, on the principle that to lose one’s life is to
find it- to find freedom of action unimpeded by self-frustration and
the anxiety inherent in trying to save and control the Self.
If nirvana is related to the cessation (nir-) of turnings (vritti), the
term is synonymous with the aim of yoga, de"ned in the Yogasutra
as citta vritti nirodha–the cessation of turnings of the mind. These
“turnings” are the thoughts whereby the mind endeavors to grasp
the world and itself. Yoga is the practice of trying to stop these
thoughts by thinking about them, until the utter futility of the
process is felt so vividly that it simply drops away, and the mind
discovers its natural and unconfused state.
It is obvious, however, that both etymologies give us the same
essential meaning. Nirvana is the way of life which ensues when
clutching at life has come to an end. In so far as all de"nition is
clutching, nirvana is necessarily indefinable. It is the natural, “unself-grasped” state of the mind; and here, of course, the mind has no
speci"c meaning, for what is not grasped is not known in the
conventional sense of knowledge. More popularly and literally
understood, nirvana is the disappearance of the being from the
Round of incarnations, not into a state of annihilation, but simply
into a state escaping definition, and thus immeasurable and infinite.
To attain nirvana is also to attain Buddhahood, awakening. But
this is not attainment in any ordinary sense, because no acquisition
and no motivation are involved. It is impossible to desire nirvana,
or to intend to reach it, for anything desirable or conceivable as an
object of action is, by definition, not nirvana. Nirvana can only arise
unintentionally, spontaneously, when the impossibility of selfgrasping has been thoroughly perceived. A Buddha, therefore, is a
man of no rank. He is not above, like an angel; he is not below,
like a demon. He does not appear anywhere in the six divisions of
the Round, and it would be mistaken to think of him as superior to
the angels, for the law of the Round is that what goes up must come
down, and vice versa. He has transcended all dualities whatsoever,
and thus it would mean nothing to him to think of himself as a
superior person or a spiritual success.
The Fourth Noble Truth describes the Eightfold Path of the
Buddha’s Dharma, that is, the method or doctrine whereby selffrustration is brought to an end. Each section of the path has a name
preceded by the word samyak (Pali, samma), which has the
meaning of “perfect” or “complete.” The "rst two sections have to
do with thought; the following four have to do with action; and the
"nal two have to do with contemplation or awareness. We
therefore have:
1 Samyag-drishti, or complete view.
2 Samyak-samkalpa, or complete understanding.
3 Samyag-vak, or complete (i.e., truthful) speech.
4 Samyak-karmanta, or complete action.
5 Samyagajiva, or complete vocation.
6 Samyag-vyayama, or complete application.
7 Samyak-smriti, or complete recollectedness.
8 Samyak-samadhi, or complete contemplation.
Without discussing these sections in detail, it may simply be said
that the first two are concerned with a proper understanding of the
doctrine and of the human situation. In some ways the first section,
“complete view,” contains all the others, since the method of
Buddhism is above all the practice of clear awareness, of seeing the
world yathabhutam–just as it is. Such awareness is a lively attention
to one’s direct experience, to the world as immediately sensed, so
as not to be misled by names and labels. Samyak-samadhi, the last
section of the path, is the perfection of the first, signifying pure
experience, pure awareness, wherein there is no longer the dualism
of the knower and the known.
The sections dealing with action are often misunderstood because
they have a deceptive similarity to a “system of morals.” Buddhism
does not share the Western view that there is a moral law, enjoined
by God or by nature, which it is man’s duty to obey. The Buddha’s
precepts of conduct–abstinence from taking life, taking what is not
given, exploitation of the passions, lying, and intoxication–are
voluntarily assumed rules of expediency, the intent of which is to
remove the hindrances to clarity of awareness. Failure to observe
the precepts produces “bad karma,” not because karma is a law or
moral retribution, but because all motivated and purposeful actions,
whether conventionally good or bad, are karma in so far as they are
directed to the grasping of life. Generally speaking, the
conventionally “bad” actions are rather more grasping than the
“good.” But the higher stages of Buddhist practice are as much
concerned with disentanglement from “good karma” as from “bad.”
Thus complete action is ultimately free, uncontrived, or
spontaneous action, in exactly the same sense as the Taoist wuwei.
Smriti, recollectedness, and samadhi, contemplation, constitute
the section dealing with the life of meditation, the inner, mental
practice of the Buddha’s way. Complete recollectedness is a
constant awareness or watching of one’s sensations, feelings, and
thoughts–without purpose or comment. It is a total clarity and
presence of mind, actively passive, wherein events come and go
like reflections in a mirror: nothing is reflected except what is.
In walking, standing, sitting, or lying down he understands that
he is so doing, so that, however his body is engaged, he
understands it just as it is.… In setting out or returning, in looking
before or around, in bending or stretching his arm, … he acts
with clear awareness.
Through such awareness it is seen that the separation of the thinker
from the thought, the knower from the known, the subject from the
object, is purely abstract. There is not the mind on the one hand
and its experiences on the other: there is just a process of
experiencing in which there is nothing to be grasped, as an object,
and no one, as a subject, to grasp it. Seen thus, the process of
experiencing ceases to clutch at itself. Thought follows thought
without interruption, that is, without any need to divide itself from
itself, so as to become its own object.
“Where there is an object, there thought arises.” Is then the
thought one thing, and the object another? No, what is the object,
just that is the thought. If the object were one thing, and the
thought another, then there would be a double state of thought.
So the object itself is just thought. Can then thought review
thought? No, thought cannot review thought. As the blade of a
sword cannot cut itself, as a finger-tip cannot touch itself, so a
thought cannot see itself.
This nonduality of the mind, in which it is no longer divided
against itself, is samadhi, and because of the disappearance of that
fruitless threshing around of the mind to grasp itself, samadhi is a
state of profound peace. This is not the stillness of total inactivity,
for, once the mind returns to its natural state, samadhi persists at all
times, in “walking, standing, sitting, and lying.” But, from the
earliest times, Buddhism has especially emphasized the practice of
recollectedness and contemplation while sitting. Most images of the
Buddha show him in the posture of sitting meditation, in the
particular attitude known as padmasana, the posture of the lotus,
with the legs crossed and the feet resting, soles upward, upon the
thighs.
Sitting meditation is not, as is often supposed, a spiritual
“exercise,” a practice followed for some ulterior object. From a
Buddhist standpoint, it is simply the proper way to sit, and it seems
perfectly natural to remain sitting so long as there is nothing else to
be done, and so long as one is not consumed with nervous
agitation. To the restless temperament of the West, sitting
agitation. To the restless temperament of the West, sitting
meditation may seem to be an unpleasant discipline, because we do
not seem to be able to sit “just to sit” without qualms of conscience,
without feeling that we ought to be doing something more
important to justify our existence. To propitiate this restless
conscience, sitting meditation must therefore be regarded as an
exercise, a discipline with an ulterior motive. Yet at that: very point
it ceases to be meditation (dhyana) in the Buddhist sense, for where
there is purpose, where there is seeking and grasping for results,
there is no dhyana.
This word dhyana (Pali, jhana) is the original Sanskrit form of the
Chinese ch’an c and the Japanese zen, and thus its meaning is of
central importance for an understanding of Zen Buddhism.
“Meditation” in the common sense of “thinking things over” or
“musing” is a most misleading translation. But such alternatives as
“trance” or “absorption” are even worse, since they suggest states of
hypnotic fascination. The best solution seems to be to leave dhyana
untranslated and add it to the English language as we have added
Nirvana and Tao.14
As used in Buddhism, the term dhyana comprises both
recollectedness (smriti) and samadhi, and can best be described as
the state of unified or one-pointed awareness. On the one hand, it is
one-pointed in the sense of being focused on the present, since to
clear awareness there is neither past nor future, but just this one
moment (ekaksana) which Western mystics have called the Eternal
Now. On the other hand, it is one-pointed in the sense of being a
state of consciousness without di;erentiation of the knower, the
knowing, and the known.
A Tathagata (i.e., a Buddha) is a seer of what is to be seen, but he
is not mindful (na mannati, or does not conceive) of the seen, the
unseen, the seeable, or the seer. So too with the heard, the
sensed, and the known: he does not think of them in these
categories.15
The di6culty of appreciating what dhyana means is that the
structure of our language does not permit us to use a transitive verb
without a subject and a predicate. When there is “knowing,”
grammatical convention requires that there must be someone who
knows and something which is known. We are so accustomed to
this convention in speaking and thinking that we fail to recognize
that it is simply a convention, and that it does not necessarily
correspond to the actual experience of knowing. Thus when we say,
“A light flashed,” it is somewhat easier to see through the
grammatical convention and to realize that the flashing is the light.
But dhyana as the mental state of the liberated or awakened man is
naturally free from the confusion of conventional entities with
reality. Our intellectual discomfort in trying to conceive knowing
without a distinct “someone” who knows and a distinct “something”
which is known, is like the discomfort of arriving at a formal dinner
in pajamas. The error is conventional, not existential.
Once again, therefore, we see how convention, how the maya of
measurement and description, populates the world with those
ghosts which we call entities and things. So hypnotic, so persuasive
is the power of convention that we begin to feel these ghosts as
realities, and make of them our loves, our ideals, our prized
possessions. But the anxiety-laden problem of what will happen to
me when I die is, after all, like asking what happens to my fist
when I open my hand, or where my lap goes when I stand up.
Perhaps, then, we are now able to understand the celebrated
summary of the Buddha’s doctrine given in the Visuddhimagga:
Suffering alone exists, none who suffer;
The deed there is, but no doer thereof;
Nirvana is, but no one seeking it;
The Path there is, but none who travel it. (16)
1 See Monier-Williams, Sanskrit-English Dictionary, p. ix. (Oxford, 1951.)
2 Rigveda x. 90. The translation is from R. T. H. Gri6th. Purusha is “the Person,” i.e.,
the original consciousness behind the world.
3 Brihadaranyaka Upanishad i. 4. 5.
4 Bhagavad-Gita xiii. 13.
5 Coomaraswamy (1), p. 77.
6 Bashya on Kena Upanishad, 9–11. “Cannot” may give the wrong implication since the
word is ordinarily privative. The point is that, as light has no need to shine upon itself
since it is luminous already, so there is no advantage to be gained and, indeed, no
meaning in the notion of Brahman’s being the object of his own knowledge.
7 From the same root as maya, and from which also come our words “mensuration”
(Lat., mensura), “mental” (Lat., mens), “dimension,” and “man” himself, “the measure of
all things.” Cf. also the Latin mensis (month).
8 Samyutta Nikaya, 421.
9 Or, if we were to translate duhkha as “sour,” we might say that the Buddha’s doctrine
is that life is soured by man’s grasping attitude towards it–as milk turns sour when kept
too long.
10 The dynamic structure of the Round is called pratitya-samutpada, the twelvefold
chain of “dependent origination,” in which the twelve causal links give rise to one
another mutually, constituting a closed circle without beginning or end. Thus ignorance
(avidya) gives rise to motivation (samskara), and this in series to consciousness
(vijnana), name-and-form (namarupa), the six senses (shadayatana), sense stimulation
(sparsa), sense experience (vedana), grasping (trishna), possessiveness (upadana),
coming-to-be (bhava), birth (jati), and old-age-and-death (jaramarana), which again
gives rise to avidya. The Buddha explained that avidya was put "rst on the list, not
because it was the temporal beginning of the series, but for simple convenience of
exposition. The whole series arises together, and its terms exist only in relation to one
another.
11 Technically such action would be called akarma, unconditioned action, or
asamskrita, uncontrived action.
12 Majjhima Nikaya, I. 56.
13 Sikshasamuccaya, 234. In Conze (2), p. 163.
14 The Pali Canon (Vinaya Titaka, III. 3–6, and Majjhima Nikaya, I. 349–52) lists eight
types of jhana–the four rupa-jhana and the four arupa-jhana–the states of jhana with
form and without form. The "rst four involve the progressive settling of conception
(vitakka) and discursive thought (vicara) into a state of equanimity (upekkha) through
the practice of samadhi. In other words, as the mind returns to its natural state of
integrity and non-duality, it ceases to clutch at experience with the symbols of
discursive thought, It simply perceives without words or concepts. Beyond this lie the
four arupa-jhana, described as the spheres of Boundless Space, Boundless
Consciousness, Nothingness, and Neither-Perception-nor-Nonperception, which are
stages of the mind’s realization of its own nature. At the time of his death, the Buddha
is said to have entered into parinirvana (i.e., final nirvana) from the fourth rupa-jhana.
15 Anguttara Nikaya, II. 25.
Three
MAHAYANA BUDDHISM
Because the teaching of the Buddha was a way of liberation, it had
no other object than the experience of nirvana. The Buddha did not
attempt to set forth a consistent philosophical system, trying to
satisfy that intellectual curiosity about ultimate things which expects
answers in words. When pressed for such answers, when questioned
about the nature of nirvana, the origin of the world, and the reality
of the Self, the Buddha maintained a “noble silence,” and went on
to say that such questions were irrelevant and did not lead to the
actual experience of liberation.
It has often been said that the later development of Buddhism
was due to the inability of the Indian mind to rest content with that
silence, so that at last it had to indulge its overwhelming urge for
“abstract metaphysical speculations” about the nature of reality.
Such a view of the genesis of Mahayana Buddhism is, however,
rather misleading. The vast body of Mahayana doctrine arose not so
much to satisfy intellectual curiosity as to deal with the practical
psychological problems encountered in following the Buddha’s
way. Certainly the treatment of these problems is highly scholastic,
and the intellectual level of the Mahayana texts is very lofty. But the
consistent aim is to bring about the experience of liberation, not to
construct a philosophical system. In the words of Sir Arthur
Berriedale Keith:
The metaphysics of the Mahayana in the incoherence of its
systems shows clearly enough the secondary interest attaching to
it in the eyes of the monks, whose main interest was concentrated
on the attainment of release; the Mahayana no less than the
Hinayana is concerned vitally with this practical end, and its
philosophy is of value merely in so far as it helps men to attain
their aim.
There are, no doubt, respects in which Mahayana Buddhism is a
concession both to intellectual curiosity and to a popular desire for
short cuts to the goal. But at root it is the work of highly sensitive
and perceptive minds studying their own inner workings. To
anyone who is highly self-aware, the Buddhism of the Pali Canon
leaves many practical problems unanswered. Its psychological
insight goes little further than the construction of analytical
catalogues of mental functions, and though its precepts are clear it
is not always helpful in explaining their practical di3culties.
Perhaps it is too sweeping a generalization, but one receives the
impression that whereas the Pali Canon would unlock the door to
nirvana by sheer e5ort, the Mahayana would jiggle the key until it
turns smoothly. Thus the great concern of the Mahayana is the
provision of “skillful means” (upaya) for making nirvana accessible
to every type of mentality.
How and when the Mahayana doctrines arose is a matter of
historical guesswork. The great Mahayana sutras are ostensibly the
teachings of the Buddha and his immediate disciples, but their style
is so di5erent and their doctrine so much more subtle than that of
the Pali Canon that scholars almost unanimously assign them to
later dates. There is no evidence of their existence in the time of the
great Buddhist emperor Asoka, grandson of Chandragupta Maurya,
who was converted to Buddhism in 262 B.C. Asoka’s rock
inscriptions re:ect no more than the social teachings of the Pali
Canon, its insistence on ahimsa or nonviolence to both men and
animals and its general precepts for the life of the laity. The
principal Mahayana texts were being translated into Chinese by
Kumarajiva shortly after A.D. 400, but our knowledge of Indian
history during the intervening six hundred years from Asoka’s death
is so fragmentary, and the internal evidences of the sutras
themselves so vague, that we can do little more than assign them to
the four hundred years between 100 B.C. and A.D. 300. Even
specific individuals associated with their development–Asvaghosha,
Nagarjuna, Asanga, and Vasubandbu–can be dated only very
approximately.
The traditional Mahayanist account of its own origin is that its
teachings were delivered by the Buddha to his intimate disciples
but their public revelation withheld until the world was ready for
them. The principle of “delayed revelation” is a well-known
expedient for permitting the growth of a tradition, for exploring the
implications contained in the original seed. Apparent contradictions
between earlier and later doctrines are explained by assigning them
to di5erent levels of truth, ranging from the most relative to the
absolute, and of which the (probably quite late) Avatamsaka School
distinguishes no less than five. However, the problem of the
historical origins of the Mahayana is of no very direct importance
for an understanding of Zen, which, as a Chinese rather than Indian
form of Buddhism, came into being when Indian Mahayana was
fully grown. We can pass on, therefore, to the central Mahayana
doctrines from which Zen arose.
The Mahayana distinguishes itself from the Buddhism of the Pali
Canon by terming the latter the Little (hina) Vehicle (yana) of
liberation and itself the Great (maha) Vehicle-great because it
comprises such a wealth of upaya, or methods for the realization of
nirvana. These methods range from the sophisticated dialectic of
Nagarjuna, whose object is to free the mind of all fixed
conceptions, to the Sukhavati or Pure Land doctrine of liberation
through faith in the power of Amitabha, the Buddha of Boundless
Light, who is said to have attained his awakening many aeons
before the time of Gautama. They include even the Tantric
Buddhism of medieval India, wherein liberation may be realized
through the repetition of sacred words and formulae called dharani,
and through special types of yoga involving sexual intercourse with
a shakti or “spiritual wife.”2
A preliminary study of the Pali Canon will certainly give the
impression that nirvana is to be realized only through rigorous
e5ort and self-control, and that the aspirant should lay aside all
other concerns for the pursuit of this ideal. Mahayanists may be
perfectly correct in assuming that the Buddha intended this
emphasis as an upaya, a skillful means of enabling one to realize,
concretely and vividly, the absurd vicious circle of desiring not to
desire, or of trying to get rid of sel?shness by oneself. For this is
certainly the conclusion to which the practice of the Buddha’s
doctrine led. It may be attributed to laziness and loss of nerve, but it
seems more plausible to suggest that those who remained in the
path of self-deliverance were merely unconscious of the paradox
involved. For wherever the Mahayana continues to teach the way of
liberation by one’s own effort, it does so as an expedient for
bringing the individual to a vivid awareness of his own futility.
Various indications suggest that one of the earliest notions of the
Mahayana was the conception of the Bodhisattva, not simply as a
potential Buddha, but as one who by renouncing nirvana was at a
higher spiritual level than one who attained it and so withdrew
from the world of birth-and-death. In the Pali Canon the disciples of
the Buddha who attain nirvana are termed Arhans or “worthy
ones,” but in the Mahayana texts the ideal of the Arhan is accounted
almost selfish. It is fit only for the sravaka, the “hearer” of the
doctrine who has progressed only so far as to get a theoretical
understanding. The Bodhisattva, however, is one who realizes that
there is a profound contradiction in a nirvana attained by himself
and for himself. From the popular standpoint, the Bodhisattva
became a focus of devotion (bhakti), a savior of the world who had
vowed not to enter the ?nal nirvana until all other sentient beings
had likewise attained it. For their sakes he consented to be born
again and again into the Round of samsara, until, in the course of
innumerable ages, even the grass and the dust had attained
Buddhahood.
But from a deeper standpoint it became obvious that the idea of
the Bodhisattva is implicit in the logic of Buddhism, that it :ows
naturally from the principle of not-grasping and from the doctrine
of the unreality of the ego. For if nirvana is the state in which the
attempt to grasp reality has wholly ceased, through the realization
of its impossibility, it will obviously be absurd to think of nirvana
itself as something to be grasped or attained. If, furthermore, the
ego is merely a convention, it is nonsense to think of nirvana as a
state to be attained by some being. As is said in the Vajracchedika:
All Bodhisattva-heroes should cultivate their minds to think: all
sentient beings of whatever class … are caused by me to attain
the boundless liberation of nirvana. Yet when vast, innumerable,
and immeasurable numbers of beings have thus been liberated, in
truth no being has been liberated! Why is this, Subhuti? It is
because no Bodhisattva who is truly a Bodhisattva holds to the
idea of an ego, a personality, a being, or a separate individual.
(3)
The corollary of this position is that if there is no nirvana which
can be attained, and if, in reality, there are no individual entities, it
will follow that our bondage in the Round is merely apparent, and
that in fact we are already in nirvana–so that to seek nirvana is the
folly of looking for what one has never lost. Naturally, then, the
Bodhisattva makes no motion to depart from the Round of samsara,
as if nirvana were somewhere else, for to do so would imply that
nirvana is something that needs to be attained and that samsara is
an actual reality. In the words of the Lankavatara Sutra:
Those who, afraid of the su5erings arising from the
discrimination of birth-and-death (samsara), seek for Nirvana, do
not know that birth-and-death and Nirvana are not to be
separated from one another; and, seeing that all things subject to
discrimination have no reality, (they) imagine that Nirvana
consists in the future annihilation of the senses and their fields.
(II. 18)
To strive, then, to blot out the conventional world of things and
events is to admit that it exists in reality. Hence the Mahayanist
principie that “what has never arisen does not have to be
annihilated.”
These are not the idle speculations and sophistries of a system of
subjective idealism or nihilism. They are answers to a practical
problem which may be expressed thus: “If my grasping of life
involves me in a vicious circle, how am I to learn not to grasp?
How can I try to let go when trying is precisely not letting go?”
Stated in another way, to try not to grasp is the same thing as to
grasp, since its motivation is the same–my urgent desire to save
myself from a difficulty. I cannot get rid of this desire, since it is one
and the same desire as the desire to get rid of it! This is the
familiar, everyday problem of the psychological “double-bind,” of
creating the problem by trying to solve it, of worrying because one
worries, and of being afraid of fear.
Mahayana philosophy proposes a drastic but e5ective answer
which is the theme of a class of literature called Prajna–paramita,
or “wisdom for crossing to the other shore,” a literature closely
associated with the work of Nagarjuna (c. A.D. 200), who ranks
with Shankara as one of the greatest minds of India. Stated baldly,
the answer is that all grasping, even for nirvana, is futile–for there is
nothing to be grasped. This is Nagarjuna’s celebrated Sunyavada, his
“Doctrine of the Void,” otherwise known as the Madhyamika, the
“middle way,” because it refutes all metaphysical propositions by
demonstrating their relativity. From the standpoint of academic
philosophy, the Prajna-paramita and the doctrine of Nagarjuna are
no doubt some form of nihilism or “absolute relativism.” But this is
not Nagarjuna’s standpoint. The dialectic with which he demolishes
every conception of reality is merely a device for breaking the
vicious circle of grasping, and the terminus of his philosophy is not
the abject despair of nihilism but the natural and uncontrived bliss
(ananda) of liberation.
The Sunyavada takes its name from the term sunya, void, or
sunyata, voidness, with which Nagarjuna described the nature of
reality, or rather, of the conceptions of reality which the human
mind can form. Conceptions here include not only metaphysical
views but also ideals, religious beliefs, ultimate hopes and
ambitions of every kind–everything which the mind of man seeks
and grasps for his physical or spiritual security. Not only does the
Sunyavada demolish the beliefs which one consciously adopts; it
also seeks out the hidden and unconscious premises of thought and
action, and submits them to the same treatment until the very
action, and submits them to the same treatment until the very
depths of the mind are reduced to a total silence. Even the idea of
sunya is itself to be voided.
It cannot be called void or not void,
Or both or neither;
But in order to point it out,
It is called “the Void.”4
Stcherbatsky (1) is certainly right in thinking that the Sunyavada
is best called a doctrine of relativity. For Nagarjuna’s method is
simply to show that all things are without “self-nature” (svabhava)
or independent reality since they exist only in relation to other
things. Nothing in the universe can stand by itself-no thing, no fact,
no being, no event–and for this reason it is absurd to single
anything out as the ideal to be grasped. For what is singled out
exists only in relation to its own opposite, since what is is defined
by what is not, pleasure is defined by pain, life is de?ned by death,
and motion is defined by stillness. Obviously, the mind can form no
idea of what “to be” means without the contrast of “not to be,”
since the ideas of being and non-being are abstractions from such
simple experiences as that there is a penny in the right hand and no
penny in the left.
From one point of view, the same relativity exists between
nirvana and samsara, bodhi (awakening) and klesa (de?lement).
That is to say, the search for nirvana implies the existence and the
problem of samsara, and the quest for awakening implies that one
is in the state of defilement with delusion. To put it in another way:
as soon as nirvana is made an object of desire, it becornes an
element of samsara. The real nirvana cannot be desired because it
cannot be conceived. Thus the Lankavatara Sutra says:
Again, Mahamati, what is meant by non-duality? It means that
light and shade, long and short, black and white, are relative
terms, Mahamati, and not independent of each other; as Nirvana
and Samsara are, all things are not-two. There is no Nirvana
except where is Samsara; there is no Samsara except where is
Nirvana; for the condition of existence is not of a mutually
exclusive character. Therefore it is said that all things are nondual as are Nirvana and Samsara. (II. 28)
But the equation “Nirvana is samsara” is true in another sense as
well–namely, that what appears to us to be samsara is really
nirvana, and that what appears to be the world of form (rupa) is
really the void (sunya). Hence the famous saying:
Form is not different from emptiness; emptiness is not different
from form. Form is precisely emptiness; emptiness is precisely
form.
Once again, this is not to say that awakening will cause the world
of form to vanish without trace, for nirvana is not to be sought as
“the future annihilation of the senses and their ?elds.” The sutra is
saying that form is void just as it is, in all its prickly uniqueness.
The point of this equation is not to assert a metaphysical
proposition but to assist the process of awakening. For awakening
will not come to pass when one is trying to escape or change the
everyday world of form, or to get away from the particular
experience in which one finds oneself at this moment. Every such
attempt is a manifestation of grasping. Even the grasping itself is
not to be changed by force, for
bodhi [awakening] is the five offenses, and the five offenses are
bodhi.… If anyone regards bodhi as something to be attained, to
be cultivated by discipline, he is guilty of the pride of self.7
Some of these passages may suggest that the Bodhisattva may just
as well be an easygoing, worldly fellow, who-because samsara is
nirvana anyhow-can go on living just as he pleases. He may be
thoroughly deluded, but since even delusion is bodhi there would
be no point in trying to change it. There is often a deceptive
resemblance between opposite extremes. Lunatics frequently
resemble saints, and the unaffected modesty of the sage often lets
him seem to be a very ordinary person. Yet there is no easy way of
pointing out the difference, of saying what it is that the ordinary,
worldly fellow does or does not do which makes him different from
a Bodhisattva, or vice versa. The entire mystery of Zen lies in this
problem, and we shall return to it at the proper time. It is enough
to say here that the so-called “ordinary person” is only apparently
natural, or perhaps that his real naturalness feels unnatural to him.
In practice it is simply impossible to decide, intentionally, to stop
seeking for nirvana and to lead an ordinary life, for as soon as one’s
“ordinary” life is intentional it is not natural.
It is for this reason that the insistence of the Mahayana texts on
the unattainability of nirvana and bodhi is not something to be
accepted theoretically, as a mere philosophical opinion. One has to
know “in one’s bones” that there is nothing to be grasped.
Thereupon the thought came to some of the Gods in that
assembly: What the fairies talk and murmur, that we understand
though mumbled. What Subhuti has just told us, that we do not
understand!
Subhuti read their thoughts and said: There is nothing to
understand, there is nothing to understand. For nothing in
particular has been indicated, nothing in particular has been
explained.… No one will grasp this perfection of wisdom as here
explained. For no Dharma (doctrine) at all has been indicated, lit
up, or communicated. So there will be no one who can grasp it.
The point arrives, then, when it is clearly understood that all
one’s intentional acts-desires, ideals, stratagems-are in vain. In the
whole universe, within and without, there is nothing whereon to
lay any hold, and no one to lay any hold on anything. This has been
discovered through clear awareness of everything that seemed to
o5er a solution or to constitute a reliable reality, through the
intuitive wisdom called prajna, which sees into the relational
character of everything. With the “eye of prajna” the human
situation is seen for what it is–a quenching of thirst with salt water,
a pursuit of goals which simply require the pursuit of other goals, a
clutching of objects which the swift course of time renders as
insubstantial as mist. The very one who pursues, who sees and
knows and desires, the inner subject, has his existence only in
relation to the ephemeral objects of his pursuit. He sees that his
grasp upon the world is his strangle-hold about his own neck, the
hold which is depriving him of the very life he so longs to attain.
And there is no way out, no way of letting go, which he can take by
e5ort, by a decision of the will.… But who is it that wants to get
out?
There comes a moment when this consciousness of the
inescapable trap in which we are at once the trapper and the
trapped reaches a breaking point. One might almost say that it
“matures” or “ripens,” and suddenly there is what the Lankavatara
Sutra calls a “turning about in the deepest seat of consciousness.” In
this moment all sense of constraint drops away, and the cocoon
which the silkworm spun around himself opens to let him go forth
winged as a moth. The peculiar anxiety which Kierkegaard has
rightly seen to lie at the very roots of the ordinary man’s soul is no
longer there. Contrivances, ideals, ambitions, and self-propitiations
are no longer necessary, since it is now possible to live
spontaneously without trying to be spontaneous. Indeed, there is no
alternative, since it is now seen that there never was any self to
bring the self under its control.
Reduced to the bare essentials, such is the inner process which
the Sunyavada is trying to set in motion with its philosophy of total
negation. Thus the greater part of Nagarjuna’s work was a carefully
logical and systematic refutation of every philosophical position to
be found in the India of his time.9 Granting that its object is an
inner experience, Western students have always had di3culty in
understanding how such a purely negative point of view could have
any creative consequences. It must therefore be repeated that the
negations apply, not to reality itself, but to our ideas of reality. The
positive and creative content of the Sunyavada is not in the
philosophy itself, but in the new vision of reality which is revealed
when its work is done, and Nagarjuna does not spoil this vision by
trying to describe it.
The Mahayana does, however, have another term for reality
which is perhaps rather more indicative than sunya, the void. This
is the word tathata, which we may translate as “suchness,”
“thusness,” or “thatness.” Similarly, the Buddhas are called
Tathagatas–they who go, or come, “thus.” The Sanskrit word tat
(our “that”) is probably based on a child’s first efforts at speech,
when it points at something and says, “Ta” or “Da.” Fathers :atter
themselves by imagining that the child is calling them by
name–“Dada” or “Daddy.” But perhaps the child is just expressing
its recognition of the world, and saying “That!” When we say just
“That” or “Thus,” we are pointing to the realm of nonverbal
experience, to reality as we perceive it directly, for we are trying to
indicate what we see or feel rather than what we think or say.
Tathata therefore indicates the world just as it is, unscreened and
undivided by the symbols and definitions of thought. It points to the
concrete and actual as distinct from the abstract and conceptual. A
Buddha is a Tathagata, a “thus-goer,” because he is awakened to
this primary, nonconceptual world which no words can convey, and
does not confuse it with such ideas as being or non-being, good or
bad, past or future, here or there, moving or still, permanent or
impermanent. As the Bodhisattva Manjusri speaks of the Tathagata
in the Saptasatika:
Suchness (tathata) neither becomes nor ceases to become; thus do
I see the Tathagata. Suchness does not stand at any point or place;
thus do I see the Tathagata. Suchness is neither past, future, nor
present; thus do I see the Tathagata. Suchness does not arise from
the dual or the non-dual; thus do I see the Tathagata. Suchness is
neither impure nor pure; thus do I see the Tathagata. Suchness
neither arises nor comes to an end; thus do I see the Tathagata.
(195)10
Because tathata is the true state of a Buddha and of all beings
whatsoever, it is also referred to as our true or original nature, and
thus our “Buddha nature.” One of the cardinal doctrines of the
Mahayana is that all beings are endowed with Buddha nature, and
so have the possibility of becoming Buddhas. Because of the
identity of Buddha nature and tathata, the term “Buddha” is
frequently used of reality itself and not just of the awakened man. It
so comes about that in the Mahayana a Buddha is often seen as a
personification of reality, forming the basis of those popular cults in
which the Buddhas seem to be worshiped as gods. I say “seem to
be” because even Mahayana Buddhism has no real equivalent of
Judaeo-Christian theism, with its strict identification of God with
the moral principle. Furthermore, the various Buddhas who are so
venerated–Amitabha, Vairocana, Amitayus, Ratnasambhava, etc.–are
always personifications of one’s own true nature.
Here, too, lies the basis of the Buddhism of faith, of the Sukhavati
or Pure Land school, in which it is held that all e5orts to become a
Buddha are merely the false pride of the ego. All that is necessary is
to repeat the formula namo-amitabhaya (literally, “the Name of
Amitabha” or “Hail, Amitabha”) in the faith that this alone is
su3cient to bring about one’s rebirth in the Pure Land over which
Amitabha presides. In this Pure Land all the obstacles which stand
in the way of becoming a Buddha in this world are removed, so
that rebirth in the Pure Land is virtually equivalent to becoming a
Buddha. The repetition of the Name is held to be e5ective because,
in ages past, Amitabha vowed that he would not enter into supreme
Buddhahood unless rebirth in the Pure Land were assured for all
beings who invoked his name. Because he subsequently entered the
state of Buddhahood, the vow is effectively fulfilled.
Even Nagarjuna was in sympathy with this doctrine, for it is
obviously a popular and more graphic way of saying that since
one’s own true nature is already the Buddha nature, one does not
have to do anything to make it so. On the contrary, to seek to
become Buddha is to deny that one is already Buddha–and this is
the sole basis upon which Buddhahood can be realized! In short, to
become a Buddha it is only necessary to have the faith that one is a
Buddha already. Shinran, the great Japanese exponent of the Pure
Land, went even so far as to say that it was only necessary to repeat
the Name, for he saw that the attempt to make an act of faith was
too artificial, and led one to doubt one’s own faith.
Pure Land Buddhism is clearly an outgrowth of the Bodhisattva
doctrine that the proper work of the liberated man is the liberation
of all other beings by upaya or “skillful means.” By prajna or
intuitive wisdom he sees into the nature of reality, and this in turn
awakens karuna or compassion for all who are still in the bonds of
ignorance. At its deepest level karuna means something rather more
than compassion for the ignorance of others. For we saw that the
Bodhisattva’s return into the world of samsara was based on the
principle that samsara is in fact nirvana, and that “the void is
precisely form.” If prajna is to see that “form is void,” karuna is to
see that “the void is form.” It is therefore an “a3rmation” of the
everyday world in its natural “suchness,” and this is one of the
features of the Mahayana most strongly emphasized in Zen. Indeed,
it makes nonsense of the idea that Buddhism is always a philosophy
of world-denial, in which the uniqueness of forms has no
importance. It was because of karuna that Mahayana Buddhism
became the principal inspiration of Chinese art in the Sung and
Yüan dynasties, an art which stressed natural forms rather than
religious symbols. For by karuna it is seen that the dissolution of
forms into the void is in no way di5erent from the particular
characteristics of the forms themselves. The life of things is only
conventionally separable from their death; in reality the dying is the
living.
The perception that each single form, just as it is, is the void and
that, further, the uniqueness of each form arises from the fact that it
exists in relation to every other form is the basis of the
Dharmadhatu (“Dharma realm”) doctrine of the enormous
Avatamsaka Sutra. This voluminous work is probably the final
culmination of Indian Mahayana, and one of its central images is a
vast network of gems or crystals, like a spider’s web at dawn, in
which each gem re:ects all the others. This net of gems is the
Dharmadhatu, the universe, the realm of innumerable dharmas or
“thing-events.”
Chinese commentators worked out a fourfold classi?cation of the
Dharmadhatu which became of considerable importance for Zen
late in the T’ang dynasty. Their classi?cation of the “Four Dharma
Realms” b was as follows:
1 . Shih,c the unique, individual “thing-events” of which the
universe is composed.
2 . Li,d the “principle” or ultimate reality underlying the
multiplicity of things.
3. Li shih wu ai,e “between principle and thing no obstruction,”
which is to say that there is no incompatibility between nirvana and
samsara, void and form. The attainment of the one does not involve
the annihilation of the other.
4 . Shih shih wu ai,f “between thing and thing no obstruction,”
which is to say that each “thing-event” involves every other, and
that the highest insight is simply the perception of them in their
natural “suchness.” At this level every “thing-event” is seen to be
self-determinative, self-generating, or spontaneous, for to be quite
naturally what it is, to be tatha–just “thus”–is to be free and without
obstruction.
The doctrine of the Dharmadhatu is, approximately, that the
proper harmony of the universe is realized when each “thing-event”
is allowed to be freely and spontaneously itself, without
interference. Stated more subjectively, it is saying, “Let everything
be free to be just as it is. Do not separate yourself from the world
and try to order it around.” There is a subtle distinction between
this and mere laissez faire, which may be suggested by the way in
which we move our various limbs. Each one moves by itself, from
within. To walk, we do not pick up our feet with our hands. The
individual body is therefore a system of shih shih wu ai, and a
Buddha realizes that the whole universe is his body, a marvelously
interrelated harmony organized from within itself rather than by
interference from outside.
Mahayana philosophy thinks of the Buddha’s body as threefold,
as the Trikaya or “Triple Body.” His body, considered either as the
multitude of “thing-events” or as his particular human forms, is
termed the Nirmanakaya, or “Body of Transformation.” The
particular human forms are such historic and prehistoric Buddhas as
Gautama, Kasyapa, or Kanakamuni, and since these appear “in the
flesh” the Nirmanakaya includes, in principle, the entire universe of
form. There is next the Sambhogakaya, or “Body of Enjoyment.”
This is the sphere of prajna, wisdom, and karuna, compassion, the
latter looking down to the world of form, and the former looking
up to the realm of the void. Sambhogakaya might also be called the
“Body of Realization” since it is in this “body” that a Buddha
realizes that he is a Buddha. Finally there is the Dharmakaya, the
“Dharma Body,” which is the void, the sunya itself.
Nagarjuna did not discuss the way in which the void appears as
form, the Dharmakaya as the Nirmanakaya, feeling, perhaps, that
this would be completely unintelligible to those who had not
actually realized awakening. For the Buddha himself had compared
such inquiries to the foolishness of a man shot with an arrow, who
would not permit it to be taken out of his :esh until he had been
told all the details of his assailant’s appearance, family, and
motivations. Nevertheless, Nagarjuna’s successors, the brothers
Asanga and Vasubandhu (c. 280–360), who worked out the type of
Mahayana philosophy generally known as Yogacara, made some
attempt to discuss this particular problem.
According to the Yogacara the world of form is cittamatra–“mind
only”–or vijnaptimatra–“representation only.” This view seems to
have a very close resemblance to Western philosophies of subjective
idealism, in which the external and material world is regarded as a
projection of the mind. However, there seem to be some di5erences
between the two points of view. Here, as always, the Mahayana is
not so much a theoretical and speculative construction as an
account of an inner experience, and a means of awakening the
experience in others. Furthermore, the word citta is not precisely
equivalent to our “mind.” Western thought tends to de?ne mind by
opposition to matter, and to consider matter not so much as
“measure” as the solid stuff which is measured. Measure itself,
abstraction, is for the West more of the nature of mind, since we
tend to think of mind and spirit as more abstract than concrete.
But in Buddhist philosophy citta does not stand over against a
conception of solid stu5. The world has never been considered in
terms of a primary substance shaped into various forms by the
action of mind or spirit. Such an image is not in the history of
Buddhist thought, and thus the problem of how impalpable mind
can in:uence solid matter has never arisen. Wherever we should
speak of the material or physical or substantial world, Buddhism
employs the term rupa, which is not so much our “matter” as
“form.” There is no “material substance” underlying rupa unless it
be citta itself!
The diffculty of making equations and comparisons between
Eastern and Western ideas is that the two worlds do not start with
the same assumptions and premises. They do not have the same
basic categorizations of experience. When, therefore, the world has
never been divided into mind and matter, but rather into mind and
form, the word “mind” cannot mean quite the same thing in both
instances. The word “man,” for example, does not have quite the
same meaning when contrasted with “woman” as when contrasted
with “animal.”
A simplified, and somewhat rough, way of stating the difference
is that Western idealists have begun to philosophize from a world
consisting of mind (or spirit), form, and matter, whereas the
Buddhists have begun to philosophize from a world of mind and
form.
The Yogacara does not, therefore, discuss the relation of forms of
matter to mind; it discusses the relation of forms to mind, and
concludes that they are forms of mind. As a result, the term “mind”
(citta) becomes logically meaningless. But because the main concern
of Buddhism is with a realm of experience which is nonlogical and
meaningless, in the sense that it does not symbolize or signify
anything other than itself, there is no objection to “meaningless”
terms.
From the logical standpoint the proposition “Everything is mind”
says no more than that everything is everything. For if there is
nothing which is not mind, the word belongs to no class, and has no
limits, no de?nition. One might as well use “blah”–which is almost
exactly what Buddhism does with the nonsense word tathata. For
the function of these nonsense terms is to draw our attention to the
fact that logic and meaning, with its inherent duality, is a property
of thought and language but not of the actual world. The nonverbal,
concrete world contains no classes and no symbols which signify or
mean anything other than themselves. Consequently it contains no
duality. For duality arises only when we classify, when we sort our
experiences into mental boxes, since a box is no box without an
inside and an outside.
Mental boxes are probably formed in our minds long before
formal thought and language supply labels to identify them. We
have begun to classify as soon as we notice differences, regularities
and irregularities, as soon as we make associations of any kind.
But–if the word “mental” means anything at all–this act of
classiffcation is certainly mental, for to notice di5erences and to
associate them with one another is something more than simply to
respond to sense contacts. Yet if classes are a product of the mind,
of noticing, association, thought, and language, the world
considered simply as all classes of objects is a product of the mind.
This is, I think, what the Yogacara means by the assertion that the
world is mind-only (cittamatram lokam). It means that external and
internal, before and after, heavy and light, pleasant and painful,
moving and still are all ideas, or mental classi?cations. Their
relation to the concrete world is the same as that of words. Thus the
world that we know, when understood as the world as classi?ed, is
a product of the mind, and as the sound “water” is not actually
water, the classified world is not the real world.
The problem of “what” the mind is can now be seen to be the
same as the problem of “what” the real world is. It cannot be
answered, for every “what” is a class, and we cannot classify the
classi?er. Is it not, then, merely absurd to speak of the mind, the
citta, at all if there is no way of saying what it is? On the contrary,
the mathematician Kurt Gödel has given us a rigorous proof of the
fact that every logical system must contain a premise which it
cannot define without contradicting itself. The Yogacara takes
citta as its premise and does not define it, since citta is here the
equivalent of sunya and tathata. For the mind
is beyond all philosophical views, is apart from discrimination, it
is not attainable, nor is it ever born: I say there is nothing but
Mind. It is not an existence, nor is it a non-existence; it is indeed
beyond both existence and non-existence.… Out of Mind spring
in-numerable things, conditioned by discrimination (i.e.,
classi?cation) and habit-energy; these things people accept as an
external world.… What appears to be external does not exist in
reality; it is indeed Mind that is seen as multiplicity; the body,
property, and abode–all these, I say, are nothing but Mind.
Within this unde?ned continuum of citta the Yogacara describes
eight kinds of vijnana, or “discriminating consciousness.” There is a
consciousness appropriate to each of the ?ve senses; there is the
sixth sense-consciousness (mano-vijnana), unifying the other ?ve so
that what is touched or heard may be related to what is seen; there
is manas, center of the mind’s discriminative and classifying activity;
and finally there is the “store-consciousness” (alaya-vijnana), the
supra-individual mind which contains the seeds of all possible
forms.
The “store-consciousness” is almost equivalent to the citta itself,
and is supra-individual because it stands prior to every
differentiation. It is not to be conceived as a sort of ghostly gas
permeating all beings, since space and extension are likewise here
only in potentiality. In other words, the “store-consciousness” is that
from which the formal world arises spontaneously or playfully
(vikridita). For the Mahayana does not make the mistake of trying
to account for the production of the world from the mind by a
series of necessary causes. Whatever is linked by causal necessity is
of the world of maya, not beyond it. Speaking somewhat poetically,
the world illusion comes out of the Great Void for no reason,
purposelessly, and just because there is no necessity for it to do so.
For the “activity” of the Void is playful or vikridita because it is not
motivated action (karma).
Thus, as the Yogacara describes it, the production of the formal
world arises spontaneously from the “store-consciousness,” :ows up
into the manas, where the primordial differentiations are made,
passes thence into the six sense-consciousnesses, which in turn
produce the sense organs or “gates” (ayatana) through which it
finally projects the classified external world.
The Buddhist yoga therefore consists in reversing the process, in
stilling the discriminative activity of the mind, and letting the
categories of maya fall back into potentiality so that the world may
be seen in its unclassified “suchness.” Here karuna awakens, and the
Bodhisattva lets the projection arise again, having become
consciously identified with the playful and purposeless character of
the Void.
1 Keith (1), p. 273.
2 The alleged “obscenity” of maithuna, as this practice is called, is entirely in the minds
of Christian missionaries. In fact, the relationship with the shakti was anything but
promiscuous, and involved the mature and all-too-infrequent notion of a man and a
woman undertaking their spiritual development in common. This included a
sanctification of the sexual relationship which should logically have been part of the
Catholic view of marriage as a sacrament. For a full treatment see S. B. Dasgupta, An
Introduction to Tantric Buddhism (Calcutta, 1952), and Sir John Woodro5e, Shakti and
Shakta (Madras and London, 1929).
3 In Suzuki (3), p. 55. The “fields” of the senses are the areas or aspects of the external
world to which the particular sense organs are related.
4 Madhyamika Shastra, XV. 3.
5 In Suzuki (3), p. 67.
6 Prajna-paramita-hridaya Sutra (Chinese version).
7 Saptasatika-prajna-paramita Sutra, 232, 234.
8 Ashtasahasrika, II. 38, 40. In Conze (2), pp. 177–78.
9 The reader who is interested in exploring Nagarjuna’s philosophy more deeply should
refer to the magnificent work of Professor T. R. V. Murti, The Central Philosophy of
Buddhism. (See Bibliography.) Unhappily, there are now available only fragmentary
translations of Nagarjuna’s writings in English, unless he was indeed the author of the
Prajna-paramita literature, for which see Conze (2, 3).
10 “Suchness is neither past, future, nor present,” for when it is seen that there is
neither past nor future there is no more a present, since the idea of the present has
meaning only in relation to past and future.
11 For a general account see E. Nagel and J. R. Newman, “Gödel’s Proof,” Scientific
American, CXCVI. 6 (June, 1956), pp. 71–86.
12 Lankavatara Sutra, 154, 29–30, 32–33. In Suzuki (2), p. 242. I have cited the
Lankavatara for both Madhyamika and Yogacara viewpoints, since either both schools
have used the sutra or else it is a work of the latter incorporating views of the former.
Since historical order is here a matter of conjecture, I have simply chosen sources
which seem to express the ideas in question most effectively.
Four
THE RISE AND DEVELOPMENT OF ZEN
The qualities which distinguish Zen or Ch’an from other types of
Buddhism are rather elusive when it comes to putting them in
words, yet Zen has a definite and unmistakable “flavor.” Although
the name Zen is dhyana, or meditation, other schools of Buddhism
emphasize meditation as much as, if not more than, Zen–and at
times it seems as if the practice of formal meditation were not
necessary to Zen at all. Nor is Zen peculiar in “having nothing to
say,” in insisting that the truth cannot be put into words, for this is
already the Madhyamika as well as the teaching of Lao-tzu.
Those who know do not speak;
Those who speak do not know. (56)
Perhaps the special flavor of Zen is best described as a certain
directness. In other schools of Buddhism, awakening or bodhi seems
remote and almost superhuman, something to be reached only after
many lives of patient effort. But in Zen there is always the feeling
that awakening is something quite natural, something startlingly
obvious, which may occur at any moment. If it involves a diffculty,
it is just that it is much too simple. Zen is also direct in its way of
teaching, for it points directly and openly to the truth, and does not
trifle with symbolism.
Direct pointing (chih-chih a) is the open demonstration of Zen by
nonsymbolic actions or words, which usually appear to the
uninitiated as having to do with the most ordinary secular affairs, or
to be completely crazy. In answer to a question about Buddhism,
the master makes a casual remark about the weather, or performs
some simple action which seems to have nothing to do with
philosophical or spiritual matters. However, it is difficult to find
many instances of this method before the middle of the T’ang
dynasty, by which time Zen was already well established. But it is
certainly consistent with the emphasis of the earlier masters on
immediate awakening in the midst of everyday affairs.
No one has been able to find any trace of a specific Dhyana
School in Indian Buddhism, though because of our lack of historical
materials this is no evidence that it did not exist. If the characteristic
note of Zen is immediate or instantaneous awakening (tun wu b)
without passing through preparatory stages, there are certainly
evidences of this principle in India. The Lankavatara Sutra states
that there are both gradual and sudden (yugapat) ways of
awakening, the former by purification of the tainted outflows or
projections (ashrava) of the mind, and the latter by paravritti–an
instantaneous “turning about” within the depths of consciousness
whereby dualistic views are cast off. It is likened to a mirror
immediately reflecting whatever forms and images appear before
it. There is, too, a clear connection between the idea of immediate
awakening and the teaching of the Vajracchedika, or “Diamond
Cutter Sutra,” on the fact that to attain awakening is not to attain
anything. In other words, if nirvana is actually here and now so that
to seek it is to lose it, a realization through progressive stages is
hardly appropriate. One would have to see into it in the present
moment, directly.
Although its origins are probably later than those of Zen in China,
there is also a tradition of this kind in Tantric Buddhism, and there
is nothing to indicate that there was a reverse influence from
Chinese Zen. Parallels to Zen sayings may be seen in a tenth-century
Tantric work by Saraha:
If it [the Truth] is already manifest, what’s the use of meditation?
And if it is hidden, one is just measuring darkness. (20)
Mantras and tantras, meditation and concentration,
They are all a cause of self-deception.
Do not defile in contemplation thought that is pure in its own
nature,
But abide in the bliss of yourself and cease those torments. (23)
Whatever you see, that is it,
In front, behind, in all the ten directions.
Even today let your master make an end of delusion! (28)
The nature of the sky is originally clear,
But by gazing and gazing the sight becomes obscured. (34)2
Tibetan Buddhism likewise comprises a tradition of the Short Path,
considered as a swift and steep ascent to nirvana for those who
have the necessary courage, though a doctrine more suggestive of
the Zen emphasis on immediacy and naturalness is found in the
“Six Precepts” of Tilopa:
No thought, no reflection, no analysis,
No cultivation, no intention;
Let it settle itself.
Immediate release without any special contrivance or intention is
also implied in the Tantric idea of sahaja, the “easy” or “natural”
state of the liberated sage.
This is not the place to discuss the real meaning of immediate
awakening and naturalness, but these instances are cited to show
that the tradition of a direct path existed outside China, suggesting
some original source in Indian Buddhism. An obvious reason for the
lack of materials would be that a principle of this kind, so easily
open to misinterpretation, might have been kept as a “secret
doctrine,” discussed openly only in later times. Zen tradition does
indeed maintain that immediate awakening is not communicated
by the sutras, but has been passed down directly from master to
pupil. This does not necessarily imply anything so “esoteric” as an
experience conveyed by telepathy, but something much less
sensational. Thus when Hindu pandits insist that wisdom is not to
be gained from the scriptures but only from a teacher or guru, it
means that the actual texts–such as the Yoga-sutras–contain only the
headings of the doctrine, and that its full explanation requires
someone who has learned the oral tradition. To this it should
hardly be necessary to add that since the tradition is primarily an
experience, words can communicate it no more and no less than
any other experience.
However, it is not really necessary to suppose that there was ever
a specific Dhyana School in India. The creation of Zen would seem
to be suffciently explained by the exposure of Taoists and
Confucians to the main principles of Mahayana Buddhism.
Therefore the appearance of trends very close to Zen can be seen
almost as soon as the great Mahayana sutras became available in
China–that is to say, with the work of the great Indian scholar-monk
Kumarajiva. Kumarajiva was translating the sutras in Ku-tsang and
Ch’ang-an between 384 and 413, at which time one of his
outstanding students was the young monk Seng-chao (384–414),
who had started out in life as a copyist of the Confucian and Taoist
texts.
Seng-chao had been converted to Buddhism as a result of reading
the Vimalakirti Sutra–a text which has exercised considerable
influence upon Zen. Although Seng-chao became a monk, this sutra
is the story of a layman, Vimalakirti, who excelled all the Buddha’s
disciples in the depth of his understanding. He had surpassed all the
other disciples and Bodhisattvas by answering a question as to the
nature of the nondual reality with a “thunderous silence”–an
example frequently followed by Zen masters. Vimalakirti
“thunderingly silent” is, too, a favorite theme of Zen artists. But the
main importance of this sutra for China and for Zen was the point
that perfect awakening was consistent with the affairs of everyday
life, and that, indeed, the highest attainment was to “enter into
awakening without exterminating the defilements [klesa].”
There was an appeal here to both the Confucian and the Taoist
mentality. The Confucian stress on the importance of family life
would not easily sympathize with a rigorously monastic type of
Buddhism. Though the Chinese Buddhist masters were normally
monks, they had large numbers of advanced lay students, and Zen,
in particular, has always attached great importance to the
expression of Buddhism in formally secular terms–in arts of every
type, in manual labor, and in appreciation of the natural universe.
Confucian and Taoist alike would be especially agreeable to the
idea of an awakening which did not involve the extermination of
human passions, as klesa may also be translated. We have already
noted the peculiar trust in human nature which both these
philosophies professed. However, not exterminating the passions
does not mean letting them flourish untamed. It means letting go of
them rather than fighting them, neither repressing passion nor
indulging it. For the Taoist is never violent, since he achieves his
ends by noninterference (wu-wei), which is a kind of psychological
judo.
Seng-chao’s writings, as well as his commentary on the
Vimalakirti Sutra, are full of Taoist quotations and phrases, for he
seemed to be following the example of less important, though
earlier, monks such as Hui-yüan (334–416) and Tao-an (312–385)
in using “extension of the idea” (ko-i c) for explaining Buddhism
through Taoist parallels. So much did this suggest an equivalence
between the two traditions that by the end of the fifth century Liu
Ch’iu could say:
From the K’un-lun mountains eastward the (Taoist) term “Great
Oneness” is used. From Kashmir westward the (Buddhist) term
sambodhi is used. Whether one looks longingly toward “nonbeing” (wu) or cultivates “emptiness” (sunyata), the principle
involved is the same.
Two of Seng-chao’s doctrines would seem to have had some
importance for the later development of Zen–his view of time and
change, and his idea that “prajna is not knowledge.” The chapter on
“The Immutability of Things” in his Book of Chao is so original and
so startlingly similar to the section on time in the first volume of
Dogen’s Shobogenzo, that the celebrated Japanese Zen philosopher
can hardly have been unfamiliar with it.
Past things are in the past and do not go there from the present,
and present things are in the present, and do not go there from
the past.… Rivers which compete with one another to inundate
the land do not flow. The “wandering air” that blows about is not
moving. The sun and moon, revolving in their orbits, do not turn
around.5
In the same way Dogen pointed out that firewood does not become
ashes and life does not become death, just as the winter does not
become the spring. Every moment of time is “self-contained and
quiescent.”
Seng-chao also discussed the seeming paradox that prajna is a
kind of ignorance. Because the ultimate reality has no qualities and
is not a thing, it cannot become an object of knowledge. Therefore
prajna, direct insight, knows the truth by not knowing.
Wisdom knows not, yet it illumines the deepest profundity. Spirit
calculates not, yet it responds to the necessities of the given
moment. Because it calculates not, spirit shines in lonely glory in
what is beyond the world. Because it knows not, Wisdom
illumines the Mystery (hsüan) beyond mundane affairs. Yet
though Wisdom lies outside affairs, it never lacks them. Though
Spirit lies beyond the world, it stays ever within it.
Here is one of the main links between Taoism and Zen, for the style
and terminology of the Book of Chao is Taoist throughout though
the subject matter is Buddhist. The sayings of the early Zen masters,
such as Hui-neng, Shen-hui, and Huang-po, are full of these very
ideas–that truly to know is not to know, that the awakened mind
responds immediately, without calculation, and that there is no
incompatibility between Buddhahood and the everyday life of the
world.
Even closer to the standpoint of Zen was Seng-chao’s fellow
student Tao-sheng (360–434), the first clear and unequivocal
exponent of the doctrine of instantaneous awakening. If nirvana is
not to be found by grasping, there can be no question of
approaching it by stages, by the slow process of the accumulation of
knowledge. It must be realized in a single flash of insight, which is
tun wu, or, in Japanese, satori, the familiar Zen term for sudden
awakening. Hsieh Ling-yün in his discussion of Tao-sheng’s
doctrine even suggests that instantaneous awakening is more
appropriate to the Chinese mentality than to the Indian, and lends
weight to Suzuki’s description of Zen as the Chinese “revolution”
against Indian Buddhism. Tao-sheng’s doctrine, however unusual
and startling, must have found considerable acceptance. It is
mentioned again, more than a century later, in a work by Hui-yüan
(523–592), who also associates it with the master Hui-tan who lived
until about 627.
The importance of these early precursors of Zen is that they
provide a clue to the historical beginnings of the movement if we
cannot accept the traditional story that it arrived in China in 520,
with the Indian monk Bodhidharma. Modern scholars such as Fung
Yu-lan and Pelliot have cast serious doubts upon the truth of this
tradition. They suggest that the Bodhidharma story was a pious
invention of later times, when the Zen School needed historical
authority for its claim to be a direct transmission of experience
from the Buddha himself, outside the sutras. For Bodhidharma is
represented as the twenty-eighth of a somewhat fanciful list of
Indian Patriarchs, standing in a direct line of “apostolic succession”
from Gautama.9
At this stage of the inquiry it is hard to say whether the views of
these scholars are to be taken seriously, or whether they are but
another instance of an academic fashion for casting doubt upon the
historicity of religious founders. The traditional story which the Zen
School gives of its own origin is that Bodhidharma arrived in
Canton from India around the year 520, and proceeded to the court
of the Emperor Wu of Liang, an enthusiastic patron of Buddhism.
However, Bodhidharma’s doctrine and his abrupt attitude did not
appeal to the Emperor, so that he withdrew for some years to a
monastery in the state of Wei, and spent his time “gazing at the
wall” until at last he found a suitable disciple in Hui-k’o, who
subsequently became the Second Patriarch of Zen in China.
There is, of course, nothing improbable in the arrival of a great
Buddhist master from India at this period. Kumarajiva had arrived
shortly before 400, Bodhiruci just after 500, and Paramartha was at
the court of Liang about the same time as Bodhidharma. Is it really
surprising that there should be no surviving record of his existence
until little more than a hundred years after his time? These were
not the days of newspapers and “Who’s Whos,” and even in our
own excessively documented times people with important
contributions to our knowledge and culture can remain
unrecognized and unrecorded until years after their death. Here
again, it seems that we may as well accept the story of
Bodhidharma until there is some really overwhelming evidence
against it, recognizing that the ideas of Seng-chao, Tao-sheng, and
others could also have been tributaries to the stream of Zen.
One of the reasons for suspecting the Bodhidharma story is that
Zen is so Chinese in style that an Indian origin seems improbable.
Yet the very Taoistic Seng-chao was a pupil of Kumarajiva, as was
Tao-sheng, and the writings attributed to Bodhidharma and his
successors until Hui-neng (638–713) show the clear transition from
an Indian to a Chinese view of dhyana.11
The absence of any record of a Dhyana School in Indian Buddhist
literature, or of Bodhidharma in connection with it, is perhaps due
to the fact that there was never any Dhyana or Zen School even in
China until some two hundred years after Bodhidharma’s time. On
the other hand, there would have been an almost universal practice
o f dhyana–that is, or ts’o-ch’an d (Japanese, za-zen) or sitting
meditation–among Buddhist monks, and the special instructors who
supervised this practice were called dhyana masters, no matter what
their school or sect. There were likewise vinaya masters, or
instructors in monastic discipline, and dharma masters, or
instructors in doctrine. Zen became a distinct school only as it
promulgated a view of dhyana which differed sharply from the
generally accepted practice.
Zen tradition represents Bodhidharma as a fierce-looking fellow
with a bushy beard and wide-open, penetrating eyes–in which,
however, there is just the hint of a twinkle. A legend says that he
once fell asleep in meditation and was so furious that he cut off his
eyelids, and falling to the ground they arose as the first tea plant.
Tea has thereafter supplied Zen monks with a protection against
sleep, and so clarifies and invigorates the mind that it has been said,
“The taste of Zen [ch’an] and the taste of tea [ch’a] are the same.”
Another legend holds that Bodhidharma sat so long in meditation
that his legs fell off. Hence the delightful symbolism of those
Japanese Daruma dolls which represent Bodhidharma as a legless
roly-poly so weighted inside that he always stands up again when
pushed over. A popular Japanese poem says of the Daruma doll:
Jinsei nana korobi
Ya oki.
Such is life–
Seven times down,
Eight times up!
Bodhidharma’s alleged interview with the Emperor Wu of Liang
is typical of his abrupt and direct manner. For the Emperor
described all that he had done to promote the practice of
Buddhism, and asked what merit he had gained thereby–taking the
popular view that Buddhism is a gradual accumulation of merit
through good deeds, leading to better and better circumstances in
future lives, and finally to nirvana. But Bodhidharma replied, “No
merit whatever!” This so undermined the Emperor’s idea of
Buddhism that he asked, “What, then, is the sacred doctrine’s first
principle?” Bodhidharma replied, “It’s just empty; there’s nothing
sacred.” “Who, then, are you,” said the Emperor, “to stand before
us?” “I don’t know.”13 e
After this interview, so unsatisfactory from the Emperor’s point of
view, Bodhidharma retired to a monastery in Wei, where he is said
to have spent nine years in a cave, “gazing at the wall” (pi-kuan f).
Suzuki holds that this is not to be taken literally, and that the
expression refers to Bodhidharma’s inner state, his exclusion of all
grasping thoughts from his mind.14 Thus Bodhidharma remained,
until he was approached by the monk Shenkuang, afterwards Huik’o (486–593, maybe!), who was to become Bodhidharma’s
k’o (486–593, maybe!), who was to become Bodhidharma’s
successor as the Second Patriarch.
Hui-k’o again and again asked Bodhidharma for instruction, but
was always refused. Yet he continued to sit in meditation outside
the cave, waiting patiently in the snow in the hope that
Bodhidharma would at last relent. In desperation he finally cut off
his left arm and presented it to Bodhidharma as a token of his
agonized sincerity. At this Bodhidharma at last asked Hui-k’o what
he wanted.
“I have no peace of mind [hsin],” said Hui-k’o. “Please pacify my
mind.”
“Bring out your mind here before me,” replied Bodhidharma,
“and I will pacify it!”
“But when I seek my own mind,” said Hui-k’o, “I cannot find it.”
“There!” snapped Bodhidharma, “I have pacified your mind!”15 g
At this moment Hui-k’o had his awakening, his tun-wu or satori,
so that this interchange purports to be the first instance of what
became the characteristic Zen method of instruction–the wen-ta h
(Japanese, mondo) or “question-and-answer,” sometimes loosely
called the “Zen story.” The greater part of Zen literature consists of
these anecdotes, many of them much more puzzling than this, and
their aim is always to precipitate some type of sudden realization
in the questioner’s mind, or to test the depth of his insight. For this
reason, such anecdotes cannot be “explained” without spoiling their
e:ect. In some respects they are like jokes which do not produce
their intended e:ect of laughter when the “punch line” requires
further explanation. One must see the point immediately, or not at
all.
It should, furthermore, be understood that the main character of
these anecdotes is only rarely symbolic, and then, usually, in a
rather secondary way, as when the dialogue contains allusions
which are obvious to both parties. But such commentators as Gernet
(3) are, I feel, mistaken in supposing that the main point is the
communication of some Buddhist principle by means of a symbol.
The satori which so frequently follows these interchanges is by no
means a mere comprehension of the answer to a riddle. For
whatever the Zen master says or does is a direct and spontaneous
utterance of “suchness,” of his Buddha nature, and what he gives is
no symbol but the very thing. Zen communication is always “direct
pointing,” in line with the traditional four-phrase summary of Zen:
Outside teaching; apart from tradition.
Not founded on words and letters.
Pointing directly to the human mind.
Seeing into one’s nature and attaining Buddhahood.
The successor to Hui-k’o is said to have been Seng-ts’an (d. 606),
and the story of their initial interview is of the same form as
between Hui-k’o and Bodhidharma, except that where Hui-k’o
asked for “peace of mind,” Seng-ts’an asked to be “cleansed of
faults.” To him there is attributed a celebrated poem called the
Hsin-hsin Ming, the “Treatise on Faith in the Mind.” If Seng-ts’an
was indeed its author, this poem is the first clear and
comprehensive statement of Zen. Its Taoist flavor is apparent in the
opening lines,
The perfect Tao is without difficulty,
Save that it avoids picking and choosing.
And again,
Follow your nature and accord with the Tao;
Saunter along and stop worrying.
If your thoughts are tied you spoil what is genuine.…
Don’t be antagonistic to the world of the senses,
For when you are not antagonistic to it,
It turns out to be the same as complete Awakening.
The wise person does not strive (wu-wei);
The ignorant man ties himself up.…
If you work on your mind with your mind,
How can you avoid an immense confusion?
Not only is the poem full of such Taoist terms as wu-wei and tzu-
Not only is the poem full of such Taoist terms as wu-wei and tzujan (spontaneity), but its whole attitude is that of letting one’s mind
alone and trusting it to follow its own nature–in contrast to the
more typically Indian attitude of bringing it under rigid control and
shutting out the experience of the senses.
The Fourth Patriarch, following Seng-ts’an, is believed to have
been Tao-hsin (579–651). When he came to Seng-ts’an he asked,
“What is the method of liberation?”
“Who binds you?” replied Seng-ts’an.
“No one binds me.”
“Why then,” asked Seng-ts’an, “should you seek liberation?”
And this was Tao-hsin’s satori. The Ch’uan Teng Lu records a
fascinating encounter between Tao-hsin and the sage Fa-yung, who
lived in a lonely temple on Mount Niu-t’ou, and was so holy that
the birds used to bring him offerings of flowers. As the two men
were talking, a wild animal roared close by, and Tao-hsin jumped.
Fa-yung commented, “I see it is still with you!”–referring, of course,
to the instinctive “passion” (klesa) of fright. Shortly afterwards,
while he was for a moment unobserved, Tao-hsin wrote the Chinese
character for “Buddha” on the rock where Fa-yung was accustomed
to sit. When Fa-yung returned to sit down again, he saw the sacred
Name and hesitated to sit. “I see,” said Tao-hsin, “it is still with
you!” At this remark Fa-yung was fully awakened … and the birds
never brought any more flowers.
The Fifth Patriarch–and here we begin to enter a more reliable
chapter of history-was Hung–jan (601–675). At his first meeting
with Hung-jan the Patriarch asked:
“What is your name [hsing]?”
“I have a nature [hsing],” replied Hung-jan punning, “but it’s no
usual nature.”
“What is this name?” inquired the Patriarch, missing the pun.
“It’s Buddha nature.”
“You have no name, then?”
“That’s because it’s an empty nature.”
Hung-jan was apparently the first of the Patriarchs to have any
large following, for it is said that he presided over a group of some
five hundred monks in a monastery on the Yellow Plum Mountain
(Wang-mei Shan) at the eastern end of modern Hupeh. He is,
however, much overshadowed by his immediate successor, Huineng (637–713), whose life and teaching mark the definitive
beginning of a truly Chinese Zen–of Zen as it flourished during what
was later called “the epoch of Zen activity,” the latter two hundred
years of the T’ang dynasty, from about 700 to 906.
One must not overlook Hui-neng’s contemporaries, for he lived at
a time which was most creative for Chinese Buddhism as a whole.
The great translator and traveler Hsüan-tsang had returned from
India in 645, and was expounding the vijnaptimatra
(“representation-only”) doctrines of the Yogacara in Ch’ang-an. His
former student Fa-tsang (643–712) was developing the important
school of the Hua-yen (Japanese, Kegon) based on the Avatamsaka
Sutra, and which later provided Zen with a formal philosophy. Nor
must we forget that not so long before these two men, Chih-k’ai
(538–597) had written his remarkable treatise on the Mahayana
Method of Cessation and Contemplation, containing the
fundamental teaching of the T’ien-t’ai School, which is in many
ways close to Zen. Much of Chih-k’ai’s treatise foreshadows in both
content and terminology the doctrines of Hui-neng and some of his
immediate successors.
Hui-neng is said to have had his first awakening when, almost as
a boy, he happened to overhear someone reading the
Vajracchedika. He set out almost at once for Hung-jan’s monastery
at Wang-mei to have his understanding confirmed and to receive
further instruction. We should note (for future reference) that his
original satori occurred spontaneously, without the benefit of a
master, and that his biography represents him as an illiterate
peasant from the neighborhood of Canton. Apparently Hung-jan
immediately recognized the depth of his insight, but fearing that his
humble origins might make him unacceptable in a community of
scholarly monks, the Patriarch put him to work in the kitchen
compound.
Some time later, the Patriarch announced that he was looking for
a successor to whom he might transmit his office, together with the
robe and begging bowl (said to have been handed down from the
Buddha) which were its insignia. This honor was to be conferred
upon the person who submitted the best poem, expressing his
understanding of Buddhism. The chief monk of the community was
then a certain Shen-hsiu, and all the others naturally assumed that
the office would go to him and so made no attempt to compete.
Shen-hsiu, however, was in doubt as to his own understanding,
and decided to submit his poem anonymously, claiming authorship
only if the Patriarch approved of it. During the night, then, he
posted the following lines in the corridor near the Patriarch’s
quarters:
The body is the Bodhi Tree;
The mind like a bright mirror standing.
Take care to wipe it all the time,
And allow no dust to cling.
The following morning, the Patriarch read the poem and ordered
incense to be burned before it, saying that all who put it into
practice would be enabled to realize their true nature. But when
Shen-hsiu came to him in private and claimed authorship, the
Patriarch declared that his understanding was still far from perfect.
On the following day, another poem appeared beside the first:
There never was a Bodhi Tree,
Nor bright mirror standing.
Fundamentally, not one thing exists,
So where is the dust to cling? m
The Patriarch knew that only Hui-neng could have written this, but
to avoid jealousy he rubbed out the poem with his shoe, and
summoned Hui-neng to his room secretly, by night. Here he
conferred the Patriarchate, the robe, and the bowl upon him, and
told him to flee into the mountains until the hurt feelings of the
other monks had subsided and the time was ripe for him to begin
his public teaching.
A comparison of the two poems shows at once the distinctive
flavor of Hui-neng’s Zen. Shen-hsiu’s poem reflects what was
apparently the general and popular view of dhyana practice in
Chinese Buddhism. It was obviously understood as the discipline of
sitting meditation (ts’o-ch’an), in which the mind was “purified” by
an intense concentration which would cause all thoughts and
attachments to cease. Taken rather literally, many Buddhist and
Taoist texts would substantiate this view–that the highest state of
consciousness is a consciousness empty of all contents, all ideas,
feelings, and even sensations. Today in India this is a very prevalent
notion of samadhi. But our own experience with Christianity should
make this type of literalism, even in high circles, rather familiar.
Hui-neng’s position was that a man with an empty consciousness
was no better than “a block of wood or a lump of stone.” He
insisted that the whole idea of purifying the mind was irrelevant
and confusing, because “our own nature is fundamentally clear and
pure.” In other words, there is no analogy between consciousness or
mind and a mirror that can be wiped. The true mind is “no-mind”
(wu-hsin), which is to say that it is not to be regarded as an object
of thought or action, as if it were a thing to be grasped and
controlled. The attempt to work on one’s own mind is a vicious
circle. To try to purify it is to be contaminated with purity.
Obviously this is the Taoist philosophy of naturalness, according to
which a person is not genuinely free, detached, or pure when his
state is the result of an artificial discipline. He is just imitating
purity, just “faking” clear awareness. Hence the unpleasant selfrighteousness of those who are deliberately and methodically
religious.
Hui-neng’s teaching is that instead of trying to purify or empty
the mind, one must simply let go of the mind–because the mind is
nothing to be grasped. Letting go of the mind is also equivalent to
letting go of the series of thoughts and impressions (nien) which
come and go “in” the mind, neither repressing them, holding them,
nor interfering with them.
Thoughts come and go of themselves, for through the use of
wisdom there is no blockage. This is the samadhi of prajna, and
natural liberation. Such is the practice of “no-thought” [wu-nien].
But if you do not think of anything at all, and immediately
command thoughts to cease, this is to be tied in a knot by a
method, and is called an obtuse view. (2)
Of the usual view of meditation practice he said:
To concentrate on the mind and to contemplate it until it is still
is a disease and not dhyana. To restrain the body by sitting up for
a long time–of what benefit is this towards the Dharma? (8) 0
And again:
If you start concentrating the mind on stillness, you will merely
produce an unreal stillness.… What does the word “meditation”
[ts’o-ch’an] mean? In this school it means no barriers, no
obstacles; it is beyond all objective situations whether good or
bad. The word “sitting” [ts’o] means not to stir up thoughts in the
mind. (5)
In counteracting the false dhyana of mere empty-mindedness,
Hui-neng compares the Great Void to space, and calls it great, not
just because it is empty, but because it contains the sun, moon, and
stars. True dhyana is to realize that one’s own nature is like space,
and that thoughts and sensations come and go in this “original
mind” like birds through the sky, leaving no trace. Awakening, in
his school, is “sudden” because it is for quickwitted rather than
slow-witted people. The latter must of necessity understand
gradually, or more exactly, after a long time, since the Sixth
Patriarch’s doctrine does not admit of stages or growth. To be
awakened at all is to be awakened completely, for, having no parts
or divisions, the Buddha nature is not realized bit by bit.
His final instructions to his disciples contain an interesting clue to
the later development of the mondo or “question-answer” method
of teaching:
If, in questioning you, someone asks about being, answer with
non-being. If he asks about non-being, answer with being. If he
asks about the ordinary man, answer in terms of the sage. If he
asks about the sage, answer in terms of the ordinary man. By this
method of opposites mutually related there arises an
understanding of the Middle Way. For every question that you are
asked, respond in terms of its opposite. (10)
Hui-neng died in 713, and with his death the institution of the
Patriarchate ceased, for the genealogical tree of Zen put forth
branches. Hui-neng’s tradition passed to five disciples: Huai-jang (d.
775), Ch’ing-yüan (d. 740), Shen-hui (668–770), Hsüan-chüeh (665–
713), and Hui-chung (677–744).23 The spiritual descendants of
Huai-jang and Hsing-ssu live on today as the two principal schools
of Zen in Japan, the Rinzai and the Soto. In the two centuries
following the death of Hui-neng the proliferation of lines of descent
and schools of Zen is quite complex, and we need do no more than
consider some of the more influential individuals.
The writings and records of Hui-neng’s successors continue to be
concerned with naturalness. On the principle that “the true mind is
no-mind,” and that “our true nature is no (special) nature,” it is
likewise stressed that the true practice of Zen is no practice, that is,
the seeming paradox of being a Buddha without intending to be a
Buddha. According to Shen-hui:
If one has this knowledge, it is contemplation [samadhi] without
contemplating, wisdom [prajna] without wisdom, practice
without practicing. (4. 193)
All cultivation of concentration is wrong-minded from the start.
For how, by cultivating concentration, could one obtain
concentration? (1. 117)
If we speak of working with the mind, does this working
consist in activity or inactivity of the mind? If it is inactivity, we
should be no di:erent from vulgar fools. But if you say that it is
activity, it is then in the realm of grasping, and we are bound up
by the passions [klesa]. What way, then, should we have of
gaining deliverance? The sravakas cultivate emptiness, dwell in
emptiness, and are bound by it. They cultivate concentration,
dwell in concentration, and are bound by it. They cultivate
tranquillity, dwell in tranquillity, and are bound by it.… If
working with the mind is to discipline one’s mind, how could
this be called deliverance? (1. 118)
In the same vein Hsüan-chüeh begins his celebrated poem, the
Song of Realizing the Tao (Cheng-tao Ke):
See you not that easygoing Man of Tao, who has abandoned
learning and does not strive [wu-wei]?
He neither avoids false thoughts nor seeks the true,
For ignorance is in reality the Buddha nature,
And this illusory, changeful, empty body is the Dharma body.
The following story is told of Huai-jang, initiating into Zen his great
successor Ma-tsu (d. 788), who was at the time practicing sitting
meditation at the monastery of Ch’uan-fa.
“Your reverence,” asked Huai-jang, “what is the objective of
sitting in meditation?”
“The objective,” answered Ma-tsu, “is to become a Buddha.”
Thereupon Huai-jang picked up a floor-tile and began to polish
it on a rock.
“What are you doing, master?” asked Ma-tsu.
“I am polishing it for a mirror,” said Huai-jang.
“How could polishing a tile make a mirror?”
“How could sitting in meditation make a Buddha?”27 s
Ma-tsu was the first Zen master celebrated for “strange words and
extraordinary behavior,” and is described as one who walked like a
bull and glared like a tiger. When a monk asked him, “How do you
get into harmony with the Tao?” Ma-tsu replied, “I am already out
of harmony with the Tao!” He was the first to answer questions
about Buddhism by hitting the questioner, or by giving a loud
shout–“Ho!”28 t Sometimes, however, he was more discursive, and
one of his lectures takes up the problem of discipline thus:
The Tao has nothing to do with discipline. If you say that it is
attained by discipline, when the discipline is perfected it can
again be lost (or, finishing the discipline turns out to be losing
the Tao).… If you say that there is no discipline, this is to be the
same as ordinary people.29 u
Hsing-ssu’s disciple Shih-t’ou (700–790), in the line of Soto Zen,
was even more forthright:
My teaching which has come down from the ancient Buddhas is
not dependent on meditation (dhyana) or on diligent application
of any kind. When you attain the insight as attained by the
Buddha, you realize that mind is Buddha and Buddha is mind,
that mind, Buddha, sentient beings, bodhi and klesa are of one
and the same substance while they vary in names.30
His interesting name “Stone-head” is attributed to the fact that he
lived on top of a large rock near the monastery of Heng-chou.
With Ma-tsu’s disciple Nan-ch’üan (748–834) and his successor
Chao-chou (778–897), the teaching of Zen became peculiarly lively
and disturbing. The Wu-men kuan (14) tells how Nan-ch’üan
interrupted a dispute among his monks as to the ownership of a cat
by threatening to cleave the animal with his spade if none of the
monks could say a “good word”–that is, give an immediate
expression of his Zen. There was dead silence, so the master cut the
cat in two. Later in the day Nan-ch’üan recounted the incident to
Chao-chou, who at once put his shoes on his head and left the
room. “If you had been here,” said Nan-ch’üan, “the cat would have
been saved!”
Chao-chou is said to have had his awakening after the following
incident with Nan-ch’üan:
Chao-chou asked, “What is the Tao?”
The master replied, “Your ordinary [i.e., natural] mind is the
Tao.”
“How can one return into accord with it?”
“By intending to accord you immediately deviate.” v
“But without intention, how can one know the Tao?”
“The Tao,” said the master, “belongs neither to knowing nor not
knowing. Knowing is false understanding; not knowing is blind
ignorance. If you really understand the Tao beyond doubt, it’s like
the empty sky. Why drag in right and wrong?”31
When Chao-chou was asked whether a dog has Buddha nature–
which is certainly the usual Mahayana doctrine–he gave the one
word “No!” (Wu,w Japanese, Mu). When a monk asked him for
instruction he merely inquired whether he had eaten his gruel, and
then added, “Go wash your bowl!” When asked about the spirit
which remains when the body has decomposed, he remarked, “This
morning it’s windy again.”
Ma-tsu had another notable disciple in Po-chang (720–814), who
is said to have organized the first purely Zen community of monks
and to have laid down its regulations on the principle that “a day of
no working is a day of no eating.” Since his time a strong emphasis
on manual work and some degree of self-support has been
characteristic of Zen communities. It might be remarked here that
these are not exactly monasteries in the Western sense. They are
rather training schools, from which one is free to depart at any time
without censure. Some members remain monks for their whole
lives; others become secular priests in charge of small temples; still
others may return into lay life.35 To Po-chang is attributed the
famous definition of Zen, “When hungry, eat; when tired, sleep.” He
is said to have had his satori when Ma-tsu shouted at him and left
him deaf for three days, and to have been in the habit of pointing
out the Zen life to his disciples with the saying, “Don’t cling; don’t
seek.” For when asked about seeking for the Buddha nature he
answered, “It’s much like riding an ox in search of the ox.”
Po-chang’s student Huang-po (d. 850) is also of considerable
importance in this period. Not only was he the teacher of the great
Lin-chi, but he was also the author of the Ch’uan Hsin Fa Yao, or
“Treatise on the Essentials of the Doctrine of Mind.” The content of
“Treatise on the Essentials of the Doctrine of Mind.” The content of
this work is essentially the same body of doctrine as is found in
Hui-neng, Shen-hui, and Ma-tsu, but it contains some passages of
remarkable clarity as well as some frank and careful answers to
questions at the end.
By their very seeking for it [the Buddha nature] they produce the
contrary e:ect of losing it, for that is using the Buddha to seek for
the Buddha, and using mind to grasp mind. Even though they do
their utmost for a full kalpa, they will not be able to attain to it.
(1)
If those who study the Tao do not awake to this mind
substance, they will create a mind over and above mind, seek the
Buddha outside themselves and remain attached to forms,
practices and performances–all of which is harmful and not the
way to supreme knowledge. (3)36
Much of it is devoted to a clarification of what is meant by the
Void, and by the terms “no-mind” (wu-hsin) and “no-thought” (wunien), all of which are carefully distinguished from literal blankness
or nothingness. The use of Taoist language and ideas is found
throughout the text:
Fearing that none of you would understand, they [the Buddhas]
gave it the name Tao, but you must not base any concept upon
that name. So it is said that “when the fish is caught the trap is
forgotten.” (From Chuang-tzu.) When body and mind achieve
spontaneity, the Tao is reached and universal mind can be
understood. (29) … In former times, men’s minds were sharp.
Upon hearing a single sentence, they abandoned study and so
came to be called “the sages who, abandoning learning, rest in
spontaneity.” In these days, people only seek to stu: themselves
with knowledge and deductions, placing great reliance on written
explanations and calling all this the practice. (30)37
It appears, however, that Huang-po’s personal instruction of his
disciples was not always so explanatory. Lin-chi (Japanese,
Rinzai, d. 867) could never get a word out of him. Every time he
Rinzai, d. 867) could never get a word out of him. Every time he
attempted to ask a question Huang-po struck him, until in
desperation he left the monastery and sought the advice of
another master, Ta-yü, who scolded him for being so ungrateful
for Huang-po’s “grandmotherly kindness.” This awakened Lin-chi,
who again presented himself before Huang-po. This time,
however, it was Lin-chi who did the striking, saying, “There is not
much in Huang-po’s Buddhism after all!”38
The record of Lin-chi’s teaching, the Lin-chi Lu (Japanese, Rinzai
Roku), shows a character of immense vitality and originality,
lecturing his students in informal and often somewhat “racy”
language. It is as if Lin-chi were using the whole strength of his
personality to force the student into immediate awakening. Again
and again he berates them for not having enough faith in
themselves, for letting their minds “gallop around” in search of
something which they have never lost, and which is “right before
you at this very moment.” Awakening for Lin-chi seems primarily a
matter of “nerve”–the courage to “let go” without further delay in
the unwavering faith that one’s natural, spontaneous functioning is
the Buddha mind. His approach to conceptual Buddhism, to the
students’ obsession with stages to be reached and goals to be
attained, is ruthlessly iconoclastic.
Why do I talk here? Only because you followers of the Tao go
galloping around in search of the mind, and are unable to stop it.
On the other hand, the ancients acted in a leisurely way,
appropriate to circumstances (as they arose). O you followers of
the Tao–when you get my point of view you will sit in judgment
on top of the … Buddhas’ heads. Those who have completed the
ten stages will seem like underlings, and those who have arrived
at Supreme Awakening will seem as if they had cangues around
their necks. The Arhans and Pratyeka-buddhas are like a dirty
privy. Bodhi and nirvana are like hitching-posts for a donkey.39
On the importance of the “natural” or “una:ected” (wu-shih z) life
he is especially emphatic:
There is no place in Buddhism for using e:ort. Just be ordinary
and nothing special. Relieve your bowels, pass water, put on your
clothes, and eat your food. When you’re tired, go and lie down.
Ignorant people may laugh at me, but the wise will understand.
… As you go from place to place, if you regard each one as your
own home, they will all be genuine, for when circumstances
come you must not try to change them. Thus your usual habits of
feeling, which make karma for the Five Hells, will of themselves
become the Great Ocean of Liberation.
And on creating karma through seeking liberation–
Outside the mind there is no Dharma, and inside also there is
nothing to be grasped. What is it that you seek? You say on all
sides that the Tao is to be practiced and put to the proof. Don’t
be mistaken! If there is anyone who can practice it, this is entirely
karma making for birth-and-death. You talk about being perfectly
disciplined in your six senses and in the ten thousand ways of
conduct, but as I see it all this is creating karma. To seek the
Buddha and to seek the Dharma is precisely making karma for
the hells.41 aa
In Ma-tsu, Nan-ch’üan, Chao-chou, Huang-po, and Lin-chi we can
see the “flavor” of Zen at its best. Taoist and Buddhist as it is in its
original inspiration, it is also something more. It is so earthy, so
matter-of-fact, and so direct. The diffculty of translating the records
of these masters is that their style of Chinese is neither classical nor
modern, but rather the colloquial speech of the T’ang dynasty. Its
“naturalness” is less refined, less obviously beautiful than that of the
Taoist sages and poets; it is almost rough and common. I say
“almost” because the expression is not really correct. We are at a
loss for parallels from other cultures for comparison, and the
Western student can best catch its flavor through observing the
works of art which it was subsequently to inspire. The best image
might be a garden consisting of no more than an expanse of raked
sand, as a ground for several unhewn rocks overgrown with lichens
and moss, such as one may see today in the Zen temples of Kyoto.
The media are the simplest imaginable; the e:ect is as if man had
hardly touched it, as if it had been transported unchanged from the
seashore; but in practice only the most sensitive and experienced
artist can achieve it. This sounds, of course, as though “Zen flavor”
were a studied and a:ected primitivism. Sometimes it is. But the
genuine Zen flavor is when a man is almost miraculously natural
without intending to be so. His Zen life is not to make himself but
to grow that way.
Thus it should be obvious that the “naturalness” of these T’ang
masters is not to be taken just literally, as if Zen were merely to
glory in being a completely ordinary, vulgar fellow who scatters
ideals to the wind and behaves as he pleases–for this would in itself
be an affectation. The “naturalness” of Zen flourishes only when
one has lost affectedness and self-consciousness of every description.
But a spirit of this kind comes and goes like the wind, and is the
most impossible thing to institutionalize and preserve.
Yet in the late T’ang dynasty the genius and vitality of Zen was
such that it was coming to be the dominant form of Buddhism in
China, though its relation to other schools was often very close.
Tsung-mi (779–841) was simultaneously a Zen master and the Fifth
Patriarch of the Hua-yen School, representing the philosophy of the
Avatamsaka Sutra. This extremely subtle and mature form of
Mahayana philosophy was employed by Tungshan (807–869) in
developing the doctrine of the Five Ranks (wu-wei bb), concerning
the fivefold relationship of the absolute (cheng cc) and the relative
(p’ien dd), and was related by his student Ts’ao-shan (840–901) to
the philosophy of the I Ching, the Book of Changes. Fa-yen (885–
958) and Fen-yang (947–1024) were also influential masters who
made a deep study of the Hua-yen, and to this day it constitutes as
it were the intellectual aspect of Zen. On the other hand, such
masters as Te-chao (891–972) and Yen-shou (904–975) maintained
close relations with the T’ien-t’ai and Pure Land Schools.
In 845 there was a brief but vigorous persecution of Buddhism by
the Taoist Emperor Wu-tsung. Temples and monasteries were
destroyed, their lands confiscated, and the monks compelled to
destroyed, their lands confiscated, and the monks compelled to
return to lay life. Fortunately, his enthusiasm for Taoist alchemy
soon involved him in experiments with the “Elixir of Immortality,”
and from partaking of this concoction he shortly died. Zen had
survived the persecution better than any other school, and now
entered into a long era of imperial and popular favor. Hundreds of
monks thronged its wealthy monastic institutions, and the fortunes
of the school so prospered and its numbers so increased that the
preservation of its spirit became a very serious problem.
Popularity almost invariably leads to a deterioration of quality,
and as Zen became less of an informal spiritual movement and
more of a settled institution, it underwent a curious change of
character. It became necessary to “standardize” its methods and to
find means for the masters to handle students in large numbers.
There were also the special problems which arise for monastic
communities when their membership increases, their traditions
harden, and their novices tend more and more to be mere boys
without natural vocation, sent for training by their pious families.
The e:ect of this last factor upon the development of institutional
Zen can hardly be underestimated. For the Zen community became
less an association of mature men with spiritual interests, and more
of an ecclesiastical boarding school for adolescent boys.
Under such circumstances the problem of discipline became
paramount. The Zen masters were forced to concern themselves not
only with the way of liberation from convention, but also with the
instilling of convention, of ordinary manners and morals, in raw
youths. The mature Western student who discovers an interest in
Zen as a philosophy or as a way of liberation must be careful to
keep this in mind, for otherwise he may be unpleasantly startled by
monastic Zen as it exists today in Japan. He will find that Zen is a
discipline enforced with the big stick. He will find that, although it
is still an e:ective way of liberation at its “upper end,” its main
preoccupation is with a disciplinary regimen which “trains
character” in the same way as the old-fashioned British public
school or the Jesuit novitiate. But it does the job remarkably well.
The “Zen type” is an extremely fine type–as types go–self-reliant,
humorous, clean and orderly to a fault, energetic though unhurried,
humorous, clean and orderly to a fault, energetic though unhurried,
and “hard as nails” without lack of keen aesthetic sensibility. The
general impression of these men is that they have the same sort of
balance as the Daruma doll: they are not rigid, but no one can
knock them down.
Still another crucial problem arises when a spiritual institution
comes into prosperity and power–the very human problem of
competition for office and of who has the right to be a master.
Concern for this problem is reflected in the writing of the Ch’uan
Teng Lu, or “Record of the Transmission of the Lamp,” by Tao-yüan
in about 1004. For one of the main objects of this work was to
establish a proper “apostolic succession” for the Zen tradition, so
that no one could claim authority unless his satori had been
approved by someone who had been approved … right back to the
time of the Buddha himself.
Nothing, however, is more di;cult than establishing proper
qualifications in the imponderable realm of spiritual insight. Where
the candidates are few the problem is not so grave, but where one
master is responsible for some hundreds of students the process of
teaching and testing requires standardization. Zen solved this
problem with remarkable ingenuity, employing a means which not
only provided a test of competence but–what was much more–a
means of transmitting the Zen experience itself with a minimum of
falsification.
This extraordinary invention was the system of the kung-an ee
(Japanese, koan) or “Zen problem.” Literally, this term means a
“public document” or “case” in the sense of a decision creating a
legal precedent. Thus the koan system involves “passing” a series of
tests based on the mondo or anecdotes of the old masters. One of
the beginning koans is Chao-chou’s answer “Wu” or “No” to the
question as to whether a dog has Buddha nature. The student is
expected to show that he has experienced the meaning of the koan
by a specific and usually nonverbal demonstration which he has to
discover intuitively.
The period of prosperity which came with the tenth and eleventh
centuries was attended by a sense of “loss of spirit,” which in turn
gave rise to much study of the great T’ang masters. Their anecdotes
gave rise to much study of the great T’ang masters. Their anecdotes
were subsequently collected in such anthologies as the Pi-yen Lu
(1125) and the Wu-men kuan (1229). The use of these anecdotes
for the koan method was originated by Yüan-wu (1063–1135) and
his disciple Ta-hui (1089–1163), in the tenth or eleventh generation
of descent from Lin-chi. However, something which already began
to resemble it was employed by Huang-lung (1002–1069) in order
to cope with his particularly large following. He devised three testquestions known as “Huang-lung’s Three Barriers”–
Question: Everybody has a place of birth. Where is your
place of birth?
Answer: Early this morning I ate white rice gruel. Now I’m
hungry again.
Question: How is my hand like the Buddha’s hand?
Answer: Playing the lute under the moon.
Question: How is my foot like a donkey’s foot?
Answer: When the white heron stands in the snow it has a
different color.
No doubt the answers given were the original replies to the
questions, but later the problem becomes both the question and its
answer, for the student is expected to see into the relationship
between the two, which, to say the least, is none too obvious. For
the moment, it is enough to say that every koan has a “point” which
is some aspect of Zen experience, that its point is often concealed
by being made very much more apparent than one would expect,
and that koans are concerned not only with the primary awakening
to the Void but also with its subsequent expression in life and
thought.
The koan system was developed in the Lin-chi (Rinzai) School of
Zen, but not without opposition. The Soto School felt that it was
much too artificial. Whereas the koan advocates used this technique
as a means for encouraging that overwhelming “feeling of doubt” (i
ching ff) which they felt to be essential as a prerequisite for satori,
the Soto School argued that it lent itself too easily to that very
seeking for satori which thrusts it away, or–what is worse–induces
an artificial satori. Adherents of the Rinzai School sometimes say
that the intensity of the satori is proportionate to the intensity of
the feeling of doubt, of blind seeking, which precedes it, but for
Soto this suggests that such a satori has a dualistic character, and is
thus no more than an artificial emotional reaction. Thus the Soto
view was that proper dhyana lay in motiveless action (wu-wei), in
“sitting just to sit,” or “walking just to walk.” The two schools
therefore came to be known respectively as k’an-hua Zen (observing
the anecdote Zen) and mo-chao Zen (silently illumined Zen).
The Rinzai School of Zen was introduced into Japan in 1191 by
the Japanese T’ien-t’ai monk Eisai (1141–1215), who established
monasteries at Kyoto and Kamakura under imperial patronage. The
Soto School was introduced in 1227 by the extraordinary genius
Dogen (1200–1253), who established the great monastery of Eiheiji,
refusing, however, to accept imperial favors. It should be noted that
Zen arrived in Japan shortly after the beginning of the Kamakura
Era, when the military dictator Yoritomo and his samurai followers
had seized power from the hands of the then somewhat decadent
nobility. This historical coincidence provided the military class, the
samurai, with a type of Buddhism which appealed to them strongly
because of its practical and earthy qualities and because of the
directness and simplicity of its approach. Thus there arose that
peculiar way of life called bushido, the Tao of the warrior, which is
essentially the application of Zen to the arts of war. The association
of the peace-loving doctrine of the Buddha with the military arts
has always been a puzzle to Buddhists of other schools. It seems to
involve the complete divorce of awakening from morality. But one
must face the fact that, in its essence, the Buddhist experience is a
liberation from conventions of every kind, including the moral
conventions. On the other hand, Buddhism is not a revolt against
convention, and in societies where the military caste is an integral
part of the conventional structure and the warrior’s role an accepted
necessity Buddhism will make it possible for him to fulfill that role
as a Buddhist. The medieval cult of chivalry should be no less of a
puzzle to the peace-loving Christian.
The contribution of Zen to Japanese culture has by no means
been confined to bushido. It has entered into almost every aspect of
the people’s life–their architecture, poetry, painting, gardening,
their athletics, crafts, and trades; it has penetrated the everyday
language and thought of the most ordinary folk. For by the genius
of such Zen monks as Dogen, Hakuin, and Bankei, by such poets as
Ryokan and Basho, and by such a painter as Sesshu, Zen has been
made extraordinarily accessible to the common mind.
Dogen, in particular, made an incalculable contribution to his
native land. His immense work, the Shobogenzo (“Treasury of the
Eye of the True Doctrine”), was written in the vernacular and
covered every aspect of Buddhism from its formal discipline to its
profoundest insights. His doctrine of time, change, and relativity is
explained with the aid of the most provoking poetic images, and it
is only regrettable that no one has yet had the time and talent to
translate this work into English. Hakuin (1685–1768) reconstituted
the koan system, and is said to have trained no less than eighty
successors in Zen. Bankei (1622–1693) found a way of presenting
Zen with such ease and simplicity that it seemed almost too good to
be true. He spoke to large audiences of farmers and country folk,
but no one “important” seems to have dared to follow him.44
Meanwhile, Zen continued to prosper in China until well into the
Ming dynasty (1368–1643), when the divisions between the various
schools of Buddhism began to fade, and the popularity of the Pure
Land School with its “easy way” of invoking the Name of Amitabha
began to be fused with koan practice and at last to absorb it. A few
Zen communities seem to have survived to the present day, but, so
far as I have been able to study them, their emphasis inclines either
to Soto or to the more “occultist” preoccupations of Tibetan
Buddhism. In either case, their view of Zen seems to be involved
with a somewhat complex and questionable doctrine of man’s
psychic anatomy, which would appear to derive from Taoist
alchemical ideas.
The history of Chinese Zen raises one problem of great
fascination. Both Rinzai and Soto Zen as we find them in Japanese
monasteries today put enormous emphasis on za-zen or sitting
meditation, a practice which they follow for many hours of the
day–attaching great importance to the correctness of posture and
the way of breathing which it involves. To practice Zen is, to all
intents and purposes, to practice za-zen, to which the Rinzai School
adds sanzen, the periodic visits to the master (roshi) for presenting
one’s view of the koan. However, the Shen-hui Ho-chang I-chi
records the following conversation between Shen-hui and a certain
Ch’eng:
The Master asked Dhyana Master Ch’eng: “What method must be
practiced to see into one’s own nature?”
“It is first of all necessary to apply oneself to the practice of
sitting cross-legged in samadhi. Once samadhi is obtained, one
must, by means of samadhi, awaken prajna in oneself. By prajna
one is able to see into one’s own nature.”
(Shen-hui:) “When one practices samadhi, isn’t this a deliberate
activity of the mind?”
(Ch’eng:) “Yes.”
(Shen-hui:) “Then this deliberate activity of the mind is an
activity of restricted consciousness, and how can it bring seeing
into one’s own nature?”
(Ch’eng:) “To see into one’s own nature, it is necessary to
practice samadhi. How could one see it otherwise?”
(Shen-hui:) “All practice of samadhi is fundamentally a wrong
view. How, by practicing samadhi, could one attain samadhi?”
(1.111)
We have already mentioned the incident between Ma-tsu and
Huai-jang, in which the latter compared sitting in meditation to
polishing a tile for a mirror. On another occasion Huai-jang said:
To train yourself in sitting meditation [za-zen] is to train yourself
to be a sitting Buddha. If you train yourself in za-zen, (you should
know that) Zen is neither sitting nor lying. If you train yourself to
be a sitting Buddha, (you should know that) the Buddha is not a
fixed form. Since the Dharma has no (fixed) abode, it is not a
matter of making choices. If you (make yourself) a sitting Buddha
this is precisely killing the Buddha. If you adhere to the sitting
position, you will not attain the principle (of Zen).
This seems to be the consistent doctrine of all the T’ang masters
from Hui-neng to Lin-chi. Nowhere in their teachings have I been
able to find any instruction in or recommendation of the type of zazen which is today the principal occupation of Zen monks. On the
contrary, the practice is discussed time after time in the apparently
negative fashion of the two quotations just cited.
It could be assumed that za-zen was so much the normal rule of
the Zen monk’s life that our sources do not bother to discuss it, and
that their teachings are designed solely for advanced students who
have so mastered za-zen that the time has come to go beyond it.
This, however, does not agree too well with the references to the
enormous clerical and lay audiences attending some of the
discourses, since it would be somewhat fantastic to suppose that
China was swarming with accomplished yogis. The discourses
frequently begin by saying, in a rather brief and o:hand fashion,
that these teachings are for those who are well trained in the
Buddhist virtues. But this could mean no more than that they are for
mature people who have mastered the ordinary social and moral
conventions, and are therefore not in danger of using Buddhism as a
pretext for rebellion against the common decencies.
Alternatively, it could be assumed that the type of za-zen under
criticism is za-zen practiced for a purpose, to “get” Buddhahood,
instead of “sitting just to sit.” This would concur with the Soto
objection to the Rinzai School with its method of cultivating the
state of “great doubt” by means of the koan. While the Soto is not
quite fair to the Rinzai in this respect, this would certainly be a
plausible interpretation of the early masters’ doctrine. However,
there are several references to the idea that prolonged sitting is not
much better than being dead. There is, of course, a proper place for
sitting–along with standing, walking, and lying–but to imagine that
sitting contains some special virtue is “attachment to form.” Thus in
the T’an-ching Hui-neng says:
A living man who sits and does not lie down;
A dead man who lies down and does not sit!
After all these are just dirty skeletons. (8)
Even in Japanese Zen one occasionally encounters a Zen practice
which lays no special emphasis upon za-zen, but rather stresses the
use of one’s ordinary work as the means of meditation. This was
certainly true of Bankei, and this principle underlies the common
use of such arts as “tea ceremony,” flute playing, brush drawing,
archery, fencing, and ju-jutsu as ways of practicing Zen. Perhaps,
then, the exaggeration of za-zen in later times is part and parcel of
the conversion of the Zen monastery into a boys’ training school. To
have them sit still for hours on end under the watchful eyes of
monitors with sticks is certainly a sure method of keeping them out
of mischief.
Yet however much za-zen may have been exaggerated in the Far
East, a certain amount of “sitting just to sit” might well be the best
thing in the world for the jittery minds and agitated bodies of
Europeans and Americans–provided they do not use it as a method
for turning themselves into Buddhas.
1 Lankavatara Sutra, II. 14, in Suzuki (3), pp. 49–51. According to tradition this was the
favorite sutra of Bodhidharma, the semi-legendary founder of Zen in China. Its
connection with Zen is fully discussed in Suzuki (2), pp. 44–63.
2 Saraha’s Treasury of Songs, translated by David Snellgrove in Conze (2), pp. 224–39.
3 The original is:
Mi-mno, mi-bsam, mi-dpyad-ching,
Mi-bsgom, mi-sems, rang-babs-bzhag.
The translation is based upon an elucidation of the passage given me by Mr. Alex
Wayman of the University of California. Mi-mno is approximately equivalent to the Zen
terms wu-hsin or wu-nien, “no-mind” or “no-thought.” Bsam is the equivalent of the
Sanskrit cintana, i.e., discursive thinking about what has been heard, and dpyad of
mimamsa, or “philosophical analysis.” Bsgom is probably bhavana or the Chinese hsiu,
“to cultivate,” “to practice,” or “intense concentration.” Sems is cetana or szu, with the
sense of intention or volition. Rang-babs-bzhag is literally “self-settle-establish,” and
“self-settle” would seem to be an almost exact equivalent of the Taoist tzu-jan, “self-so,”
“spontaneous,” or “natural.”
4 Quoted by Fung Yu-lan (1), vol. 2, p. 240, from Seng-yu, Ch’u San-tsang Chi-chi, 9.
5 Liebenthal (1), p. 49.
6 The same idea was used even before Dogen by the Zen master Ma-tsu (d. 788): “So
with former thoughts, later thoughts, and thoughts in between: the thoughts follow one
another without being linked together. Each one is absolutely tranquil.” Ku-tsun-hsü
Yü-lu, 1. 4.
7 Liebenthal (1), pp. 71–72.
8 385–433. His Discussion of Essentials (Pien Tsung Lun) is our principal source of
information about Tao-sheng’s ideas. See Fung Yu-lan (1), vol. 2, pp. 274–84.
9 Hu Shih (1) and T’ang Yung-t’ing have suggested that Bodhidharma was in China at
the earlier date of 420 to 479. See also Fung Yu-lan (1), vol. 2, pp. 386–90, Pelliot (1),
and Dumoulin (2).
10 The traditional sources are Tao-hsüan’s Sung-kao Seng-chuan (Taisho 2061),
composed between 645 and 667, and Tao-yüan’s Ching Te Ch’uan Teng Lu (Taisho
2076), written about 1004.
11 Works attributed to Bodhidharma will be found in Suzuki (1), vol. 1, pp. 165–70,
and Senzaki and McCandless (1), pp. 73–84. The style is always Indian and lacks Taoist
“flavor.”
12 Hui-neng’s Tan Ching, for example, records several instances of the Sixth Patriarch’s
interviews with dhyana masters who obviously did not belong to his own “sudden
school” of dhyana. Furthermore, it was not until the time of Po-chang (720–814), or
even later, that the Zen School had monasteries of its own. See Dumoulin and Sasaki
(1), p. 13.
13 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 3.
14 Suzuki (1), vol. 1, pp. 170–71.
15 Wu-men kuan, 41.
16 In modern Chinese the first two characters mean something like “worldly” or
“outside the fold.” In the present context they are usually taken to mean that the truth
of Zen cannot be expressed in any form of doctrine, or that a teacher can do no more
than show how to get it for oneself. However, the marvelous ambiguity of Chinese
might intentionally allow both meanings. Consider the predominantly “secular” form of
Zen expression, and such sayings as “Wash out your mouth every time you say,
‘Buddha!’ ”
17 Translations will be found in Suzuki (1), vol. 1, p. 182, and a revision in Suzuki (6),
p. 91. Another by Arthur Waley is in Conze (2) p. 295.
18 The last two lines carry the same point as Hui-k’o’s interview with Bodhidharma.
19 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 3.
20 Ch’uam Teng Lu, 3.
21 Ta-ch’eng Chih-kuan Fa-men, Taisho 1924.
22 T’an-ching, 1. The full title of the work which records the life and teaching of Huineng is the Platform-Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, or Liu-tsu T’an-ching, Taisho 2008.
For translations, see Bibliography under Wong Mou-lam and Rousselle.
23 A state of total confusion prevails among writers on Zen as to the naming of the
great T’ang masters. For example, Shen-hui’s full name is Ho-tse Shen-hui, of which the
Japanese pronunciation is Kataku Jinne. Shen-hui is his monastic name, and Ho-tse
designates his locality. Japanese writers usually refer to him as Jinne, using the
personal monastic name. On the other hand, Hsüan-chüeh is Yung-chia Hsüan-chüeh, in
Japanese Yoka Genkaku. But the Japanese writers usually employ his locality name,
Yoka! On the whole, Suzuki uses locality names and Fung Yu-lan monastic names.
Suzuki sometimes gives the Japanese form, and sometimes the Chinese, but uses a
somewhat di:erent way of romanizing the Chinese than Fung (or rather Bodde, the
translator). Lin-chi I-hsüan (Rinzai Gigen) appears in Suzuki mostly as Rinzai and
sometimes as Lin-chi, but in Fung he is Yi-hsüan! Dumoulin and Sasaki make some
attempt at consistency by using only the Japanese forms, but then it is impossible at
first sight to distinguish Chinese from Japanese individuals. Thus anyone who studies
Zen from other than the original sources is confronted with a situation which makes
historical clarity extremely diffcult. Suzuki has been so widely read that most Western
students of Zen are familiar with his usage, however inconsistent, and I do not want to
confuse them further by such an attempt at consistency as calling Hui-neng by his
locality name, Ta-chien. All I can offer is an index giving all the names. To make
matters worse, there is also much confusion with respect to dates. For Shen-hui, Fung
gives 686–760, Gernet 668–760, and Dumoulin and Sasaki 668–770.
24 This period is treated in detail in Dumoulin and Sasaki (1). Demiéville (2) has
translated a Tun-huang ms. (Pelliot 4646) concerning a debate held at Lhasa c. 792–
794 between a master of the Sudden Ch’an School and a group of Indian Buddhist
scholars. The Ch’an master is identified only by the name “Mahayana” and there is
apparently nothing to link him with the tradition descending from Hui-neng. His
doctrine seems to be somewhat more quietistic than that of the Sixth Patriarch. The fact
that the Indian scholars were astonished and repelled by his teaching suggests its
purely Chinese origin.
25 Shen-hui Ho-chang I-chi. The Chinese text has been edited by Hu Shih, Shanghai,
1930.
26 I.e., the Dharmakaya, for which see above, p. 71. Full translations of the Cheng-tao
Ke (Japanese, Shodoka) will be found in Suzuki (6) and Senzaki and McCandless (1).
27 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 5.
28 Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 1. 6.
29 Ibid., 1. 4.
30 In Suzuki (6), p. 123.
31 Wu-men kuan, 19.
32 Ibid., 1.
33 Ibid., 7.
34 Chao-chou Yü-lu, in Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 3. 13.
35 The somewhat misleading word “monk” seems to be the inevitable translation of
seng,x
 though yun shui,v
 “cloud and water,” is a common and revealingly picturesque
term for the Zen student, who “drifts like a cloud and flows like water.” But I am at a
loss to find a concise English expression for this term.
36 In Chu Ch’an (1), pp. 16 and 18. Another partial translation appears in Suzuki (6),
pp. 132–40.
37 In Chu Ch’an (1), pp. 42–43.
38 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 12.
39 Lin-chi Lu in Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 1. 4, pp. 5–6.
40 Ibid., p. 7.
41 Ibid., p. 11.
42 For a fuller description see below, p. 159. In its Japanese form Koan, the syllables
are pronounced separately-Ko-an.
43 Jen-t’ien Yen-mu, 2.
44 Because my purpose is only to give enough of the history of Zen to serve as a
background for its doctrine and practice, I am not entering into any full discussion of
its history in Japan. The work of Dogen, Hakuin, Bankei, and others will be discussed in
another context.
45 An example of this fusion may be seen in the T’ai I Chin Hua Tsung Chih, a treatise
of the Ming or perhaps Ch’ing dynasty, for which see Wilhelm (1).
46 Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 1. 1, p. 2.
47 It is true that a text known as the T’so-chan I, or “Directions for Za-zen,” is
incorporated in the Po-chang Ching-kuei–the regulations for the Zen community
attributed to Po-chang (720–814)–and that the regulations themselves prescribe times
for meditation. However, we can find no edition of this work prior to 1265 (Suzuki),
and it may even be as late as 1338 (Dumoulin). The existing version shows the
influence of the Shingon sect, which is akin to Tibetan Lamaism and came to China
during the eighth century.
48 See Suzuki (10), pp. 176–80.

PART TWO
PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE
One
“EMPTY AND MARVELOUS”
The opening words of the oldest Zen poem say that
The perfect Way [Tao] is without difficulty,
Save that it avoids picking and choosing.
Only when you stop liking and disliking
Will all be clearly understood.
A split hair’s difference,
And heaven and earth are set apart!
If you want to get the plain truth,
Be not concerned with right and wrong.
The conflict between right and wrong
Is the sickness of the mind.1 a
The point is not to make an e3ort to silence the feelings and
cultivate bland indi3erence. It is to see through the universal
illusion that what is pleasant or good may be wrested from what is
painful or evil. It was a first principle in Taoism that
When everyone recognizes beauty as beautiful, there is
already ugliness;
When everyone recognizes goodness as good, there is
already evil.
“To be” and “not to be” arise mutually;
Difficult and easy are mutually realized;
Long and short are mutually contrasted;
High and low are mutually posited; …
Before and after are in mutual sequence.
To see this is to see that good without evil is like up without down,
and that to make an ideal of pursuing the good is like trying to get
rid of the left by turning constantly to the right. One is therefore
compelled to go round in circles.
The logic of this is so simple that one is tempted to think it oversimple. The temptation is all the stronger because it upsets the
fondest illusion of the human mind, which is that in the course of
time everything may be made better and better. For it is the general
opinion that were this not possible the life of man would lack all
meaning and incentive. The only alternative to a life of constant
progress is felt to be a mere existence, static and dead, so joyless
and inane that one might as well commit suicide. The very notion
of this “only alternative” shows how firmly the mind is bound in a
dualistic pattern, how hard it is to think in any other terms than
good or bad, or a muddy mixture of the two.
Yet Zen is a liberation from this pattern, and its apparently
dismal starting point is to understand the absurdity of choosing, of
the whole feeling that life may be significantly improved by a
constant selection of the “good.” One must start by “getting the feel”
of relativity, and by knowing that life is not a situation from which
there is anything to be grasped or gained–as if it were something
which one approaches from outside, like a pie or a barrel of beer.
To succeed is always to fail–in the sense that the more one succeeds
in anything, the greater is the need to go on succeeding. To eat is to
survive to be hungry.
The illusion of significant improvement arises in moments of
contrast, as when one turns from the left to the right on a hard bed.
The position is “better” so long as the contrast remains, but before
long the second position begins to feel like the first. So one acquires
a more comfortable bed and, for a while, sleeps in peace. But the
solution of the problem leaves a strange vacuum in one’s
consciousness, a vacuum soon filled by the sensation of another
intolerable contrast, hitherto unnoticed, and just as urgent, just as
frustrating as the problem of the hard bed. The vacuum arises
because the sensation of comfort can be maintained only in relation
to the sensation of discomfort, just as an image is visible to the eye
only by reason of a contrasting background. The good and the evil,
the pleasant and the painful are so inseparable, so identical in their
difference-like the two sides of a coin-that
Fair is foul, and foul is fair,
or, in the words of a poem in the Zenrin Kushu:
To receive trouble is to receive good fortune;
To receive agreement is to receive opposition.
Another puts it more vividly:
At dusk the cock announces dawn;
At midnight, the bright sun.
Zen does not, for this reason, take the attitude that it is so futile
to eat when hungry that one may as well starve, nor is it so
inhuman as to say that when we itch we should not scratch.
Disillusionment with the pursuit of the good does not involve the
evil of stagnation as its necessary alternative, for the human
situation is like that of “Deas on a hot griddle.” None of the
alternatives o3er a solution, for the Dea who falls must jump, and
the Dea who jumps must fall. Choosing is absurd because there is
no choice.
To the dualistic mode of thought it will therefore seem that the
standpoint of Zen is that of fatalism as opposed to free choice.
When Mu-chou was asked, “We dress and eat every day, and how
do we escape from having to put on clothes and eat food?” he
answered, “We dress; we eat.” “I don’t understand,” said the monk.
“If you don’t understand, put on your clothes and eat your food.”
On being asked how to escape from the “heat,” another master
directed the questioner to the place where it is neither hot nor cold.
When asked to explain himself he replied, “In summer we sweat; in
winter we shiver.” Or, as a poem puts it:
When cold, we gather round the hearth before the blazing fire;
When hot, we sit on the bank of the mountain stream in the
bamboo grove.
And from this point of view one can
See the sun in the midst of the rain;
Scoop clear water from the heart of the fire.
But the viewpoint is not fatalistic. It is not simply submission to
the inevitability of sweating when it is hot, shivering when it is
cold, eating when hungry, and sleeping when tired. Submission to
fate implies someone who submits, someone who is the helpless
puppet of circumstances, and for Zen there is no such person. The
duality of subject and object, of the knower and the known, is seen
to be just as relative, as mutual, as inseparable as every other. We
do not sweat because it is hot; the sweating is the heat. It is just as
true to say that the sun is light because of the eyes as to say that the
eyes see light because of the sun. The viewpoint is unfamiliar
because it is our settled convention to think that heat comes ?rst
and then, by causality, the body sweats. To put it the other way
round is startling, like saying “cheese and bread” instead of “bread
and cheese.” Thus the Zenrin Kushu says:
Fire does not wait for the sun to be hot
Nor the wind for the moon, to be cool.
This shocking and seemingly illogical reversal of common sense
may perhaps be clari?ed by the favorite Zen image of “the moon in
the water.” The phenomenon moon-in-the-water is likened to
human experience. The water is the subject, and the moon the
object. When there is no water, there is no moon-in-the-water, and
likewise when there is no moon. But when the moon rises the
water does not wait to receive its image, and when even the tiniest
drop of water is poured out the moon does not wait to cast its
reDection. For the moon does not intend to cast its reDection, and
the water does not receive its image on purpose. The event is
caused as much by the water as by the moon, and as the water
manifests the brightness of the moon, the moon manifests the clarity
of the water. Another poem in the Zenrin Kushu says:
Trees show the bodily form of the wind;
Waves give vital energy to the moon.
To put it less poetically–human experience is determined as
much by the nature of the mind and the structure of its senses as by
the external objects whose presence the mind reveals. Men feel
themselves to be victims or puppets of their experience because
they separate “themselves” from their minds, thinking that the
nature of the mind-body is something involuntarily thrust upon
“them.” They think that they did not ask to be born, did not ask to
be “given” a sensitive organism to be frustrated by alternating
pleasure and pain. But Zen asks us to find out “who” it is that “has”
this mind, and “who” it was that did not ask to be born before
father and mother conceived us. Thence it appears that the entire
sense of subjective isolation, of being the one who was “given” a
mind and to whom experience happens, is an illusion of bad
semantics–the hypnotic suggestion of repeated wrong thinking. For
there is no “myself” apart from the mind-body which gives structure
to my experience. It is likewise ridiculous to talk of this mind-body
as something which was passively and involuntarily “given” a
certain structure. It is that structure, and before the structure arose
there was no mind-body.
Our problem is that the power of thought enables us to construct
symbols of things apart from the things themselves. This includes
the ability to make a symbol, an idea of ourselves apart from
ourselves. Because the idea is so much more comprehensible than
the reality, the symbol so much more stable than the fact, we learn
to identify ourselves with our idea of ourselves. Hence the
subjective feeling of a “self” which “has” a mind, of an inwardly
isolated subject to whom experiences involuntarily happen. With its
characteristic emphasis on the concrete, Zen points out that our
precious “self” is just an idea, useful and legitimate enough if seen
for what it is, but disastrous if identified with our real nature. The
unnatural awkwardness of a certain type of self-consciousness
comes into being when we are aware of conDict or contrast
between the idea of ourselves, on the one hand, and the immediate,
concrete feeling of ourselves, on the other.
When we are no longer identi?ed with the idea of ourselves, the
entire relationship between subject and object, knower and known,
undergoes a sudden and revolutionary change. It becomes a real
relationship, a mutuality in which the subject creates the object just
as much as the object creates the subject. The knower no longer
feels himself to be independent of the known; the experiencer no
longer feels himself to stand apart from the experience.
Consequently the whole notion of getting something “out” of life, of
seeking something “from” experience, becomes absurd. To put it in
another way, it becomes vividly clear that in concrete fact I have no
other self than the totality of things of which I am aware. This is the
Hua-yen (Kegon) doctrine of the net of jewels, of shih shih wu ai
(Japanese, ji ji mu ge), in which every jewel contains the reDection
of all the others.
The sense of subjective isolation is also based on a failure to see
the relativity of voluntary and involuntary events. This relativity is
easily felt by watching one’s breath, for by a slight change of
viewpoint it is as easy to feel that “I breathe” as that “It breathes
me.” We feel that our actions are voluntary when they follow a
decision, and involuntary when they happen without decision. But
if decision itself were voluntary, every decision would have to be
preceded by a decision to decide–an in?nite regression which
fortunately does not occur. Oddly enough, if we had to decide to
decide, we would not be free to decide. We are free to decide
because decision “happens.” We just decide without having the
faintest understanding of how we do it. In fact, it is neither
voluntary nor involuntary. To “get the feel” of this relativity is to
?nd another extraordinary transformation of our experience as a
whole, which may be described in either of two ways. I feel that I
am deciding everything that happens, or, I feel that everything,
including my decisions, is just happening spontaneously. For a
decision–the freest of my actions-just happens like hiccups inside
me or like a bird singing outside me.
Such a way of seeing things is vividly described by a modern Zen
master, the late Sokei-an Sasaki:
One day I wiped out all the notions from my mind. I gave up all
desire. I discarded all the words with which I thought and stayed
in quietude. I felt a little queer–as if I were being carried into
something, or as if I were touching some power unknown to
me … and Ztt! I entered. I lost the boundary of my physical body.
I had my skin, of course, but I felt I was standing in the center of
the cosmos. I spoke, but my words had lost their meaning. I saw
people coming towards me, but all were the same man. All were
myself! I had never known this world. I had believed that I was
created, but now I must change my opinion: I was never created;
I was the cosmos; no individual Mr. Sasaki existed.
It would seem, then, that to get rid of the subjective distinction
between “me” and “my experience”–through seeing that my idea of
myself is not myself–is to discover the actual relationship between
myself and the “outside” world. The individual, on the one hand,
and the world, on the other, are simply the abstract limits or terms
of a concrete reality which is “between” them, as the concrete coin
is “between” the abstract, Euclidean surfaces of its two sides.
Similarly, the reality of all “inseparable opposites”–life and death,
good and evil, pleasure and pain, gain and loss–is that “between”
for which we have no words.
Man’s identification with his idea of himself gives him a specious
and precarious sense of permanence. For this idea is relatively
?xed, being based upon carefully selected memories of his past,
memories which have a preserved and fixed character. Social
convention encourages the fixity of the idea because the very
usefulness of symbols depends upon their stability. Convention
therefore encourages him to associate his idea of himself with
equally abstract and symbolic roles and stereotypes, since these will
help him to form an idea of himself which will be de?nite and
intelligible. But to the degree that he identi?es himself with the
?xed idea, he becomes aware of “life” as something which Dows
past him–faster and faster as he grows older, as his idea becomes
more rigid, more bolstered with memories. The more he attempts
to clutch the world, the more he feels it as a process in motion.
On one occasion Ma-tsu and Po-chang were out for a walk, when
they saw some wild geese flying past.
“What are they?” asked Ma-tsu.
“They’re wild geese,” said Po-chang.
“Where are they going?” demanded Ma-tsu.
Po-chang replied, “They’ve already flown away.”
Suddenly Ma-tsu grabbed Po-chang by the nose and twisted it so
that he cried out in pain.
“How,” shouted Ma-tsu, “could they ever have flown away?”
This was the moment of Po-chang’s awakening.
The relativity of time and motion is one of the principal themes
of Dogen’s Shobogenzo, where he writes:
If we watch the shore while we are sailing in a boat, we feel that
the shore is moving. But if we look nearer to the boat itself, we
know then that it is the boat which moves. When we regard the
universe in confusion of body and mind, we often get the
mistaken belief that our mind is constant. But if we actually
practice (Zen) and come back to ourselves, we see that this was
wrong.
When firewood becomes ashes, it never returns to being
firewood. But we should not take the view that what is latterly
ashes was formerly firewood. What we should understand is that,
according to the doctrine of Buddhism, firewood stays at the
position of firewood.… There are former and later stages, but
these stages are clearly cut.
It is the same with life and death. Thus we say in Buddhism
that the Un-born is also the Un-dying. Life is a position of time.
Death is a position of time. They are like winter and spring, and
in Buddhism we do not consider that winter becomes spring, or
that spring becomes summer.
Dogen is here trying to express the strange sense of timeless
moments which arises when one is no longer trying to resist the
Dow of events, the peculiar stillness and self-sufficiency of the
succeeding instants when the mind is, as it were, going along with
them and not trying to arrest them. A similar view is expressed thus
by Ma-tsu:
A sutra says, “It is only a group of elements which come together
to make this body.” When it arises, only these elements arise.
When it ceases, only these elements cease. But when these
elements arise, do not say, “I am arising,” and when they cease,
do not say, “I am ceasing.” So, too, with our former thoughts,
later thoughts, and intervening thoughts (or, experiences): the
thoughts follow one another without being linked together. Each
one is absolutely tranquil.
Buddhism has frequently compared the course of time to the
apparent motion of a wave, wherein the actual water only moves
up and down, creating the illusion of a “piece” of water moving
over the surface. It is a similar illusion that there is a constant “self”
moving through successive experiences, constituting a link between
them in such a way that the youth becomes the man who becomes
the graybeard who becomes the corpse.
Connected, then, with the pursuit of the good is the pursuit of the
future, the illusion whereby we are unable to be happy without a
“promising future” for the symbolic self. Progress towards the good
is therefore measured in terms of the prolongation of human life,
forgetting that nothing is more relative than our sense of the length
of time. A Zen poem says:
The morning glory which blooms for an hour
Differs not at heart from the giant pine,
Which lives for a thousand years.
Subjectively, a gnat doubtless feels that its span of a few days is a
reasonably long lifetime. A tortoise, with its span of several
hundred years, would feel subjectively the same as the gnat. Not so
long ago the life expectancy of the average man was about forty-
five years. Today it is from sixty-five to seventy years, but
subjectively the years are faster, and death, when it comes, is always
all too soon. As Dogen said:
The flowers depart when we hate to lose them;
The weeds arrive while we hate to watch them grow.
This is perfectly natural, perfectly human, and no pulling and
stretching of time will make it otherwise.
On the contrary, the measuring of worth and success in terms of
time, and the insistent demand for assurances of a promising future,
make it impossible to live freely both in the present and in the
“promising” future when it arrives. For there is never anything but
the present, and if one cannot live there, one cannot live anywhere.
The Shobogenzo says:
When a fish swims, he swims on and on, and there is no end to
the water. When a bird Dies, he Dies on and on, and there is no
end to the sky. From the most ancient times there was never a
fish who swam out of the water, nor a bird who Dew out of the
sky. Yet when the fish needs just a little water, he uses just a
little; and when he needs lots, he uses lots. Thus the tips of their
heads are always at the outer edge (of their space). If ever a bird
Dies beyond that edge, he dies, and so also with the fish. From
the water the fish makes his life, and from the sky, the bird. But
this life is made by the bird and the fish. At the same time, the
bird and the fish are made by life. Thus there are the fish, the
water, and life, and all three create each other.
Yet if there were a bird who first wanted to examine the size of
the sky, or a fish who first wanted to examine the extent of the
water–and then try to Dy or to swim, they will never find their
own ways in the sky or water.
This is not a philosophy of not looking where one is going; it is a
philosophy of not making where one is going so much more
important than where one is that there will be no point in going.
The life of Zen begins, therefore, in a disillusion with the pursuit
of goals which do not really exist–the good without the bad, the
grati?cation of a self which is no more than an idea, and the
morrow which never comes. For all these things are a deception of
symbols pretending to be realities, and to seek after them is like
walking straight into a wall upon which some painter has, by the
convention of perspective, suggested an open passage. In short, Zen
begins at the point where there is nothing further to seek, nothing
to be gained. Zen is most emphatically not to be regarded as a
system of self-improvement, or a way of becoming a Buddha. In the
words of Lin-chi, “If a man seeks the Buddha, that man loses the
Buddha.”
For all ideas of self-improvement and of becoming or getting
something in the future relate solely to our abstract image of
ourselves. To follow them is to give ever more reality to that image.
On the other hand, our true, nonconceptual self is already the
Buddha, and needs no improvement. In the course of time it may
grow, but one does not blame an egg for not being a chicken; still
less does one criticize a pig for having a shorter neck than a giraffe.
A Zenrin poem says:
In the landscape of spring there is neither high nor
low;
The Dowering branches grow naturally, some long,
some short.
When Ts’ui-wei was asked about the meaning of Buddhism, he
answered: “Wait until there is no one around, and I will tell you.”
Some time later the monk approached him again, saying: “There is
nobody here now. Please answer me.” Ts’ui-wei led him out into
the garden and went over to the bamboo grove, saying nothing. Still
tall bamboo; there is a short one!” Or, as another Zenrin verse
puts it:
A long thing is the long Body of Buddha;
A short thing is the short Body of Buddha.
What is therefore to be gained from Zen is called wu-shih
(Japanese, buji) or “nothing special,” for as the Buddha says in the
Vajracchedika:
I obtained not the least thing from unexcelled, complete
awakening, and for this very reason it is called “unexcelled,
complete awakening.” (22)
The expression wu-shih also has the sense of the perfectly natural
and una3ected, in which there is no “fuss” or “business.” The
attainment of satori is often suggested by the old Chinese poem:
Mount Lu in misty rain; the River Che at high tide.
When I had not been there, no rest from the pain of
longing!
I went there and returned.… It was nothing special:
Mount Lu in misty rain; the River Che at high tide.
According to the famous saying of Ch’ing-yüan:
Before I had studied Zen for thirty years, I saw mountains as
mountains, and waters as waters. When I arrived at a more
intimate knowledge, I came to the point where I saw that
mountains are not mountains, and waters are not waters. But now
that I have got its very substance I am at rest. For it’s just that I
see mountains once again as mountains, and waters once again as
waters.
The diffculty of Zen is, of course, to shift one’s attention from the
abstract to the concrete, from the symbolic self to one’s true nature.
So long as we merely talk about it, so long as we turn over ideas in
our minds about “symbol” and “reality,” or keep repeating, “I am
not my idea of myself,” this is still mere abstractíon. Zen created the
method (upaya) of “direct pointing” in order to escape from this
vicious circle, in order to thrust the real immediately to our notice.
When reading a diffcult book it is of no help to think, “I should
concentrate,” for one thinks about concentration instead of what the
book has to say. Likewise, in studying or practicing Zen it is of no
help to think about Zen. To remain caught up in ideas and words
about Zen is, as the old masters say, to “stink of Zen.”
For this reason the masters talk about Zen as little as possible,
and throw its concrete reality straight at us. This reality is the
“suchness” (tathata) of our natural, nonverbal world. If we see this
just as it is, there is nothing good, nothing bad, nothing inherently
long or short, nothing subjective and nothing objective. There is no
symbolic self to be forgotten, and no need for any idea of a concrete
reality to be remembered.
A monk asked Chao-chou, “For what reason did the First
Patriarch come from the West?” (This is a formal question, asking
for the central point of Bodhidharma’s teaching, i.e., of Zen itself.)
Chao-chou answered: “The cypress tree in the yard.”
“Aren’t you trying,” said the monk, “to demonstrate it by means
of an objective reality?”
“I am not!” retorted the master.
“For what reason, then, did the First Patriarch come from the
West?”
“The cypress tree in the yard!”14
Notice how Chao-chou whips the monk out of his
conceptualization about the answer. When T’ung-shan was asked,
“What is the Buddha?” he answered, “Three pounds of Dax!” Upon
this Yüan-wu comments:
Various answers have been given by different masters to the
question, “What is the Buddha?” … None, however, can excel
T’ung-shan’s “three pounds (chin) of Dax” as regards its
irrationality which cuts off all passage of speculation. Some
comment that T’ung-shan was weighing Dax at the moment,
hence the answer.… Still others think that as the questioner was
not conscious of the fact that he himself was the Buddha, T’ungshan answered him in this indirect way. Such are all like corpses,
for they are utterly unable to comprehend the living truth. There
are still others who take the “three pounds of Dax” as the
Buddha. What wild and fantastic remarks they make!
The masters are resolute in cutting short all theorizing and
speculation about these answers. “Direct pointing” entirely fails in
its intention if it requires or stimulates any conceptual comment.
Fa-yen asked the monk Hsüan-tzu why he had never asked him
any questions about Zen. The monk explained that he had already
attained his understanding from another master. Pressed by Fa-yen
for an explanation, the monk said that when he had asked his
teacher, “What is the Buddha?” he had received the answer, “Pingting T’ung-tzu comes for fire!”
“A good answer!” said Fa-yen. “But I’m sure you don’t understand
it.”
“Ping-ting,” explained the monk, “is the god of fire. For him to be
seeking for fire is like myself, seeking the Buddha. I’m the Buddha
already, and no asking is needed.”
“Just as I thought!” laughed Fa-yen. “You didn’t get it.”
The monk was so offended that he left the monastery, but later
repented of himself and returned, humbly requesting instruction.
“You ask me,” said Fa-yen.
“What is the Buddha?” inquired the monk.
“Ping-ting T’ung-tzu comes for fire!”
The point of this mondo is perhaps best indicated by two poems
submitted by the Pure Land Buddhist Ippen Shonin to the Zen
master Hoto, translated by Suzuki from the Sayings of Ippen. Ippen
was one of those who studied Zen to find a rapprochement
between Zen and the Pure Land School, with its practice of
repeating the Name of Amitabha. In Japanese, the formula is
“Namu Amida Butsu!” Ippen first presented this verse:
When the Name is uttered,
Neither the Buddha nor the self
Neither the Buddha nor the self
There is:
Na-mu-a-mi-da-bu-tsu–
The voice alone is heard.
Hoto, however, felt that this did not quite express the point, but
gave his approval when Ippen submitted a second verse:
When the Name is uttered,
Neither the Buddha nor the self
There is:
Na-mu-a-mi-da-bu-tsu,
Na-mu-a-mi-da-bu-tsu!
Po-chang had so many students that he had to open a second
monastery. To find a suitable person as its master, he called his
monks together and set a pitcher before them, saying:
“Without calling it a pitcher, tell me what it is.”
The head monk said, “You couldn’t call it a piece of wood.”
At this the monastery cook kicked the pitcher over and walked
away. The cook was put in charge of the new monastery. One of
Nan-ch’üan’s lectures is worth quoting here:
During the period (kalpa) before the world was manifested there
were no names. The moment the Buddha arrives in the world
there are names, and so we clutch hold of forms. In the great Tao
there is absolutely nothing secular or sacred. If there are names,
everything is classiffied in limits and bounds. Therefore the old
man West of the River (i.e., Ma-tsu) said: “It is not mind; it is not
Buddha; it is not a thing.”
This, of course, reflects the doctrine of the Tao Te Ching that
The nameless is the origin of heaven and earth;
Naming is the mother of the ten thousand things (1).
But Lao-tzu’s “nameless” and Nan-ch’üan’s “kalpa of the void”
before the manifestation of the world are not prior to the
conventional world of things in time. They are the “suchness” of the
world just as it is now, and to which the Zen masters are directly
pointing. Po-chang’s cook was living wide awake in that world, and
answered the master’s problem in its concrete and nameless terms.
A monk asked Ts’ui-wei, “For what reason did the First Patriarch
come from the West?”
Ts’ui-wei answered, “Pass me that chin-rest.”
As soon as the monk passed it, Ts’ui-wei hit him with it.
Another master was having tea with two of his students when he
suddenly tossed his fan to one of them, saying, “What’s this?” The
student opened it and fanned himself. “Not bad,” was his comment.
“Now you,” he went on, passing it to the other student, who at once
closed the fan and scratched his neck with it. This done, he opened
it again, placed a piece of cake on it, and offered it to the master.
This was considered even better, for when there are no names the
world is no longer “classified in limits and bounds.”
There is, no doubt, some parallel between these demonstrations
and the viewpoint of Korzybskian semantics. There is the same
stress on the importance of avoiding confusion between words and
signs, on the one hand, and the indefinitely variable “unspeakable”
world, on the other. Class demonstrations of semantic principles
often resemble types of mondo. Professor Irving Lee, of
Northwestern University, used to hold up a matchbox before his
class, asking “What’s this?” The students would usually drop
squarely into the trap and say, “A matchbox!” At this Professor Lee
would say, “No, no! It’s this–” throwing the matchbox at the class,
and adding, “Matchbox is a noise. Is this a noise?”
However, it would seem that Korzybski still thought of the
“unspeakable” world as a multiplicity of indefinitely differentiated
events. For Zen, the world of “suchness” is neither one nor many,
neither uniform nor differentiated. A Zen master might hold up his
hand–to someone insisting that there are real differences in the
world–and say, “Without saying a word, point to the difference
between my fingers.” At once it is clear that “sameness” and
“di3erence” are abstractions. The same would have to be said of all
categorizations of the concrete world–even “concrete” itself–for such
terms as “physical,” “material,” “objective,” “real,” and “existential”
are extremely abstract symbols. Indeed, the more one tries to define
them, the more meaningless they turn out to be.
The world of “suchness” is void and empty because it teases the
mind out of thought, dumfounding the chatter of definition so that
there is nothing left to be said. Yet it is obvious that we are not
confronted with literal nothingness. It is true that, when pressed,
every attempt to catch hold of our world leaves us empty-handed.
Furthermore, when we try to be sure at least of ourselves, the
knowing, catching subjects, we disappear. We cannot find any self
apart from the mind, and we cannot find any mind apart from
those very experiences which the mind–now vanished–was trying to
grasp. In R. H. Blyth’s arresting metaphor, when we were just about
to swat the Dy, the Dy Dew up and sat on the swatter. In terms of
immediate perception, when we look for things there is nothing but
mind, and when we look for mind there is nothing but things. For a
moment we are paralyzed, because it seems that we have no basis
for action, no ground under foot from which to take a jump. But
this is the way it always was, and in the next moment we find
ourselves as free to act, speak, and think as ever, yet in a strange
and miraculous new world from which “self” and “other,” “mind”
and “things” have vanished. In the words of Te-shan:
Only when you have no thing in your mind and no mind in
things are you vacant and spiritual, empty and marvelous. m
The marvel can only be described as the peculiar sensation of
freedom in action which arises when the world is no longer felt to
be some sort of obstacle standing over against one. This is not
freedom in the crude sense of “kicking over the traces” and
behaving in wild caprice. It is the discovery of freedom in the most
ordinary tasks, for when the sense of subjective isolation vanishes,
the world is no longer felt as an intractable object.
Yün-men once said, “Our school lets you go any way you like. It
kills and it brings to life–either way.”
A monk then asked, “How does it kill?”
The master replied, “Winter goes and spring comes.”
“How,” asked the monk, “is it when winter goes and spring
comes?”
The master said, “Shouldering a staff you wander this way and
that, East or West, South or North, knocking at the wild stumps as
you please.”
The passing of the seasons is not passively suffered, but
“happens” as freely as one wanders in the fields, knocking at old
stumps with a stick. In the context of Christianity this might be
interpreted as feeling that one has become omnipotent, that one is
God, directing everything that happens. However, it must be
remembered that in Taoist and Buddhist thought there is no
conception of a God who deliberately and consciously governs the
universe. Lao-tzu said of the Tao:
To its accomplishments it lays no claim.
It loves and nourishes all things,
but does not lord it over them. (34)
The Tao, without doing anything (wu-wei),
leaves nothing undone. (37)
To use the imagery of a Tibetan poem, every action, every event
comes of itself from the Void “as from the surface of a clear lake
there leaps suddenly a fish.” When this is seen to be as true of the
deliberate and the routine as of the surprising and the unforeseen,
one can agree with the Zen poet P’ang-yun:
Miraculous power and marvelous activity–
Drawing water and hewing wood!
1 Seng-ts’an, Hsin-hsin Ming.
2 Tao Te Ching, 2.
3 Believe it or not, there is actually a politician in San Francisco who so detests the
political Left Wing that he will not make a left turn with his car.
4 The Zenrin Kushu is an anthology of some five thousand two-line poems, compiled by
Toyo Eicho (1429–1504). Its purpose was to provide Zen students with a source-book
of verses from which to select couplets expressing the theme of a newly solved koan.
Many masters require such a verse as soon as the proper answer to the koan has been
given. The couplets have been drawn from a vast variety of Chinese sources-Buddhist,
Taoist, classical literature, popular songs, etc.
5 Mu-chou Lu, in Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 2. 6.
6 Zenrin Ruishu, 2.
7 “The Transcendental World,” Zen Notes, vol. 1, no. 5. First Zen Institute of America.
New York, 1954.
8 Pi-yen Chi.
9 Shobogenzo, fasc. 1. For this translation I am indebted to my colleague Professor
Sabro Hasegawa.
10 Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 1. 2. 4.
11 Shobogenzo, fasc. 1. Read to the author by Sabro Hasegawa.
12 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 15.
13 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 22.
14 Chao-chou Lu in Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 3. 13.
15 Pi-yen Chi, 12, in Suzuki (1), vol. 2, pp. 71–72.
16 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 25.
17 Suzuki (1), vol. 2, p. 263.
18 Wu-men kuan, 40. However, as Wu-men comments, he fell right into Po-chang’s trap,
because he exchanged an easy job for a difficult one!
19 Nan-ch’üan Yü-lu in Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 3. 12.
20 Pi-yen Lu, 20. The chin-rest is the ch’an-pan, a board for supporting the chin during
long meditation.
21 Lien-teng Hui-yao, 22. This is Ruth Sasaki’s elegant translation in Dumoulin and
Sasaki (1), p. 48, where she points out that in this context “spiritual” connotes a state
beyond expression in words.
22 Yün-men Kuang-lu, in Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 4. 16.
23 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 8.
Two
“SITTING QUIETLY, DOING NOTHING”
In both life and art the cultures of the Far East appreciate nothing
more highly than spontaneity or naturalness (tzu-jan). This is the
unmistakable tone of sincerity marking the action which is not
studied and contrived. For a man rings like a cracked bell when he
thinks and acts with a split mind-one part standing aside to
interfere with the other, to control, to condemn, or to admire. But
the mind, or the true nature, of man cannot actually be split.
According to a Zenrin poem, it is
Like a sword that cuts, but cannot cut itself;
Like an eye that sees, but cannot see itself.
The illusion of the split comes from the mind’s attempt to be both
itself and its idea of itself, from a fatal confusion of fact with
symbol. To make an end of the illusion, the mind must stop trying
to act upon itself, upon its stream of experiences, from the
standpoint of the idea of itself which we call the ego. This is
expressed in another Zenrin poem as
Sitting quietly, doing nothing,
Spring comes, and the grass grows by itself.b
This “by itself” is the mind’s and the world’s natural way of
action, as when the eyes see by themselves, and the ears hear by
themselves, and the mouth opens by itself without having to be
forced apart by the fingers. As the Zenrin says again:
The blue mountains are of themselves blue mountains;
The white clouds are of themselves white clouds. 0
In its stress upon naturalness, Zen is obviously the inheritor of
Taoism, and its view of spontaneous action as “marvelous activity”
(miao-yung d) is precisely what the Taoists meant by the word
te–“virtue” with an overtone of magical power. But neither in
Taoism nor in Zen does it have anything to do with magic in the
merely sensational sense of performing superhuman “miracles.” The
“magical” or “marvelous” quality of spontaneous action is, on the
contrary, that it is perfectly human, and yet shows no sign of being
contrived.
Such a quality is peculiarly subtle (another meaning of miao),
and extremely hard to put into words. The story is told of a Zen
monk who wept upon hearing of the death of a close relative.
When one of his fellow students objected that it was most unseemly
for a monk to show such personal attachment he replied, “Don’t be
stupid! I’m weeping because I want to weep.” The great Hakuin
was deeply disturbed in his early study of Zen when he came across
the story of the master Yen-t’ou, who was said to have screamed at
the top of his voice when murdered by a robber.1 Yet this doubt
was dissolved at the moment of his satori, and in Zen circles his
own death is felt to have been especially admirable for its display
of human emotion. On the other hand, the abbot Kwaisen and his
monks allowed themselves to be burned alive by the soldiers of
Oda Nobunaga, sitting calmly in the posture of meditation. Such
contradictory “naturalness” seems most mysterious, but perhaps the
clue lies in the saying of Yün-men: “In walking, just walk. In sitting,
just sit. Above all, don’t wobble.” For the essential quality of
naturalness is the sincerity of the undivided mind which does not
dither between alternatives. So when Yen-t’ou screamed, it was such
a scream that it was heard for miles around.
But it would be quite wrong to suppose that this natural sincerity
comes about by observing such a platitude as “Whatsoever thy hand
findeth to do, do it with all thy might.” When Yen-t’ou screamed, he
was not screaming in order to be natural, nor did he first make up
his mind to scream and then implement the decision with the full
energy of his will. There is a total contradiction in planned
naturalness and intentional sincerity. This is to overlay, not to
discover, the “original mind.” Thus to try to be natural is an
a?ectation. To try not to try to be natural is also an a?ectation. As a
Zenrin poem says:
You cannot get it by taking thought;
You cannot seek it by not taking thought.e
But this absurdly complex and frustrating predicament arises from a
simple and elementary mistake in the use of the mind. When this is
understood, there is no paradox and no difficulty. Obviously, the
mistake arises in the attempt to split the mind against itself, but to
understand this clearly we have to enter more deeply into the
“cybernetics” of the mind, the basic pattern of its self-correcting
action.
It is, of course, part of the very genius of the human mind that it
can, as it were, stand aside from life and reAect upon it, that it can
be aware of its own existence, and that it can criticize its own
processes. For the mind has something resembling a “feed-back”
system. This is a term used in communications engineering for one
of the basic principles of “automation,” of enabling machines to
control themselves. Feed-back enables a machine to be informed of
the effects of its own action in such a way as to be able to correct its
action. Perhaps the most familiar example is the electrical
thermostat which regulates the heating of a house. By setting an
upper and a lower limit of desired temperature, a thermometer is
so connected that it will switch the furnace on when the lower limit
is reached, and off when the upper limit is reached. The
temperature of the house is thus kept within the desired limits. The
thermostat provides the furnace with a kind of sensitive organ–an
extremely rudimentary analogy of hurnan self-consciousness.
The proper adjustment of a feed-back system is always a complex
mechanical problem. For the original machine, say, the furnace, is
adjusted by the feed-back system, but this system in turn needs
adjustment. Therefore to make a mechanical system more and more
automatic will require the use of a series of feed-back systems–a
second to correct the first, a third to correct the second, and so on.
But there are obvious limits to such a series, for beyond a certain
point the mechanism will be “frustrated” by its own complexity.
For example, it might take so long for the information to pass
through the series of control systems that it would arrive at the
original machine too late to be useful. Similarly, when human
beings think too carefully and minutely about an action to be taken,
they cannot make up their minds in time to act. In other words, one
cannot correct one’s means of self-correction indefinitely. There
must soon be a source of information at the end of the line which is
the final authority. Failure to trust its authority will make it
impossible to act, and the system will be paralyzed.
The system can be paralyzed in yet another way. Every feedback
system needs a margin of “lag” or error. If we try to make a
thermostat absolutely accurate–that is, if we bring the upper and
lower limits of temperature very close together in an attempt to
hold the temperature at a constant 70 degrees–the whole system
will break down. For to the extent that the upper and lower limits
coincide, the signals for switching o? and switching on will
coincide! If 70 degrees is both the lower and upper limit the “go”
sign will also be the “stop” sign; “yes” will imply “no” and “no”
will imply “yes.” Whereupon the mechanism will start “trembling,”
going on and off, on and off, until it shakes itself to pieces. The
system is too sensitive and shows symptoms which are startlingly
like human anxiety. For when a human being is so self-conscious,
so self-controlled that he cannot let go of himself, he dithers or
wobbles between opposites. This is precisely what is meant in Zen
by going round and round on “the wheel of birth-and-death,” for
the Buddhist samsara is the prototype of all vicious circles.
Now human life consists primarily and originally in action–in
living in the concrete world of “suchness.” But we have the power
to control action by reAection, that is, by thinking, by comparing
the actual world with memories or “reAections.” Memories are
organized in terms of more or less abstract images–words, signs,
simplified shapes, and other symbols which can be reviewed very
rapidly one after another. From such memories, reAections, and
symbols the mind constructs its idea of itself. This corresponds to
the thermostat–the source of information about its own past action
by which the system corrects itself. The mind-body must, of course,
trust that information in order to act, for paralysis will soon result
from trying to remember whether we have remembered everything
accurately.
But to keep up the supply of information in the memory, the
mind-body must continue to act “on its own.” It must not cling too
closely to its own record. There must be a “lag” or distance between
the source of information and the source of action. This does not
mean that the source of action must hesitate before it accepts the
information. It means that it must not identify itself with the source
of information. We saw that when the furnace responds too closely
to the thermostat, it cannot go ahead without also trying to stop, or
stop without also trying to go ahead. This is just what happens to
the human being, to the mind, when the desire for certainty and
security prompts identification between the mind and its own
image of itself. It cannot let go of itself. It feels that it should not do
what it is doing, and that it should do what it is not doing. It feels
that it should not be what it is, and be what it isn’t. Furthermore,
the e?ort to remain always “good” or “happy” is like trying to hold
the thermostat to a constant 70 degrees by making the lower limit
the same as the upper.
The identification of the mind with its own image is, therefore,
paralyzing because the image is fixed–it is past and finished. But it
is a fixed image of oneself in motion! To cling to it is thus to be in
constant contradiction and conAict. Hence Yün-men’s saying, “In
walking, just walk. In sitting, just sit. Above all, don’t wobble.” In
other words, the mind cannot act without giving up the impossible
attempt to control itself beyond a certain point. It must let go of
itself both in the sense of trusting its own memory and reAection,
and in the sense of acting spontaneously, on its own into the
unknown.
This is why Zen often seems to take the side of action as against
reAection, and why it describes itself as “no-mind” (wu-hsin) or
“no-thought” (wu-nien), and why the masters demonstrate Zen by
giving instantaneous and unpremeditated answers to questions.
When Yün-men was asked for the ultimate secret of Buddhism, he
replied, “Dumpling!” In the words of the Japanese master Takuan:
When a monk asks, “What is the Buddha?” the master may raise
his fist; when he is asked, “What is the ultimate idea of
Buddhism?” he may exclaim even before the questioner finishes
his sentence, “A blossoming branch of the plum,” or “The
cypress-tree in the court-yard.” The point is that the answering
mind does not “stop” anywhere, but responds straightway
without giving any thought to the felicity of an answer.
This is allowing the mind to act on its own.
But reAection is also action, and Yün-men might also have said,
“In acting, just act. In thinking, just think. Above all, don’t wobble.”
In other words, if one is going to reAect, just reAect–but do not
reAect about reAecting. Yet Zen would agree that reAection about
reAection is also action–provided that in doing it we do just that,
and do not tend to drift off into the infinite regression of trying
always to stand above or outside the level upon which we are
acting. Thus Zen is also a liberation from the dualism of thought
and action, for it thinks as it acts–with the same quality of abandon,
commitment, or faith. The attitude of wu-hsin is by no means an
anti-intellectualist exclusion of thinking. Wu-hsin is action on any
level whatsoever, physical or psychic, without trying at the same
moment to observe and check the action from outside. This attempt
to act and think about the action simultaneously is precisely the
identification of the mind with its idea of itself. It involves the same
contradiction as the statement which states something about
itself–“This statement is false.”
The same is true of the relationship between feeling and action.
For feeling blocks action, and blocks itself as a form of action, when
it gets caught in this same tendency to observe or feel itself
indefinitely–as when, in the midst of enjoying myself, I examine
myself to see if I am getting the utmost out of the occasion. Not
content with tasting the food, I am also trying to taste my tongue.
Not content with feeling happy, I want to feel myself feeling
happy–so as to be sure not to miss anything.
Whether trusting our memories or trusting the mind to act on its
own, it comes to the same thing: ultimately we must act and think,
live and die, from a source beyond all “our” knowledge and
control. But this source is ourselves, and when we see that, it no
longer stands over against us as a threatening object. No amount of
care and hesitancy, no amount of introspection and searching of our
motives, can make any ultimate difference to the fact that the mind
is
Like an eye that sees, but cannot see itself.
In the end, the only alternative to a shuddering paralysis is to leap
into action regardless of the consequences. Action in this spirit may
be right or wrong with respect to conventional standards. But our
decisions upon the conventional level must be supported by the
conviction that whatever we do, and whatever “happens” to us, is
ultimately “right.” In other words, we must enter into it without
“second thought,” without the arrière-pensée of regret, hesitancy,
doubt, or self-recrimination. Thus when Yün-men was asked, “What
is the Tao?” he answered simply, “Walk on! (ch’ü f).”
But to act “without second thought,” without double-mindedness,
is by no means a mere precept for our imitation. For we cannot
realize this kind of action until it is clear beyond any shadow of
doubt that it is actually impossible to do anything else. In the words
of Huang-po:
Men are afraid to forget their own minds, fearing to fall through
the void with nothing on to which they can cling. They do not
know that the void is not really the void but the real realm of the
Dharma.… It cannot be looked for or sought, comprehended by
wisdom or knowledge, explained in words, contacted materially
(i.e., objectively) or reached by meritorious achievement. (14)5
Now this impossibility of “grasping the mind with the mind” is,
when realized, the non-action (wu-wei), the “sitting quietly, doing
nothing” whereby “spring comes, and the grass grows by itself.”
There is no necessity for the mind to try to let go of itself, or to try
not to try. This introduces further artificialities. Yet, as a matter of
psychological strategy, there is no need for trying to avoid
artificialities. In the doctrine of the Japanese master Bankei (1622–
1693) the mind which cannot grasp itself is called the “Unborn”
(fusho g), the mind which does not arise or appear in the realm of
symbolic knowledge.
A layman asked, “I appreciate very much your instruction about
the Unborn, but by force of habit second thoughts [nien] keep
tending to arise, and being confused by them it is diffcult to be
in perfect accord with the Unborn. How am I to trust in it
entirely?”
Bankei said, “If you make an attempt to stop the second
thoughts which arise, then the mind which does the stopping and
the mind which is stopped become divided, and there is no
occasion for peace of mind. So it is best for you simply to believe
that originally there is no (possibility of control by) second
thoughts. Yet because of karmic afinity, through what you see
and what you hear these thoughts arise and vanish temporarily,
but are without substance.” (2)
“Brushing off thoughts which arise is just like washing off
blood with blood. We remain impure because of being washed
with blood, even when the blood that was first there has gone–
and if we continue in this way the impurity never departs. This is
from ignorance of the mind’s unborn, unvanishing, and
unconfused nature. If we take second thought for an effective
reality, we keep going on and on around the wheel of birth-anddeath. You should realize that such thought is just a temporary
mental construction, and not try to hold or to reject it. Let it
alone just as it occurs and just as it ceases. It is like an image
reAected in a mirror. The mirror is clear and reAects anything
which comes before it, and yet no image sticks in the mirror. The
Buddha mind (i.e., the real, unborn mind) is ten thousand times
more clear than a mirror, and more inexpressibly marvelous. In
its light all such thoughts vanish without trace. If you put your
faith in this way of understanding, however strongly such
thoughts may arise, they do no harm.” (4)
This is also the doctrine of Huang-po, who says again:
If it is held that there is something to be realized or attained
apart from mind, and, thereupon, mind is used to seek it, (that
implies) failure to understand that mind and the object of its
search are one. Mind cannot be used to seek something from
mind for, even after the passage of millions of kalpas, the day of
success would never come. (10)
One must not forget the social context of Zen. It is primarily a
way of liberation for those who have mastered the disciplines of
social convention, of the conditioning of the individual by the
group. Zen is a medicine for the ill e?ects of this conditioning, for
the mental paralysis and anxiety which come from excessive selfconsciousness. It must be seen against the background of societies
regulated by the principles of Confucianism, with their heavy stress
on propriety and punctilious ritual. In Japan, too, it must be seen
in relation to the rigid schooling required in the training of the
samurai caste, and the emotional strain to which the samurai were
exposed in times of constant warfare. As a medicine for these
conditions, it does not seek to overthrow the conventions
themselves, but, on the contrary, takes them for granted–as is easily
seen in such manifestations of Zen as the cha-no-yu or “tea
ceremony” of Japan. Therefore Zen might be a very dangerous
medicine in a social context where convention is weak, or, at the
other extreme, where there is a spirit of open revolt against
convention ready to exploit Zen for destructive purposes.
With this in mind, we can observe the freedom and naturalness of
Zen without loss of perspective. Social conditioning fosters the
identification of the mind with a fixed idea of itself as the means of
self-control, and as a result man thinks of himself as “I”–the ego.
Thereupon the mental center of gravity shifts from the spontaneous
or original mind to the ego image. Once this has happened, the
very center of our psychic life is identified with the self-controlling
mechanism. It then becomes almost impossible to see how “I” can
let go of “myself,” for I am precisely my habitual e?ort to hold on
to myself. I find myself totally incapable of any mental action
which is not intentional, a?ected, and insincere. Therefore anything
I do to give myself up, to let go, will be a disguised form of the
habitual e?ort to hold on. I cannot be intentionally unintentional or
purposely spontaneous. As soon as it becomes important for me to
be spontaneous, the intention to be so is strengthened; I cannot get
rid of it, and yet it is the one thing that stands in the way of its own
fulfillment. It is as if someone had given me some medicine with
the warning that it will not work if I think of a monkey while
taking it.
While I am remembering to forget the monkey, I am in a
“double-bind” situation where “to do” is “not to do,” and vice versa.
“Yes” implies “no,” and “go” implies “stop.” At this point Zen
comes to me and asks, “If you cannot help remembering the
monkey, are you doing it on purpose?” In other words, do I have
an intention for being intentional, a purpose for being purposive?
Suddenly I realize that my very intending is spontaneous, or that my
controlling self–the ego–arises from my uncontrolled or natural self.
At this moment all the machinations of the ego come to nought; it
is annihilated in its own trap. I see that it is actually impossible not
to be spontaneous. For what I cannot help doing I am doing
spontaneously, but if I am at the same time trying to control it, I
interpret it as a compulsion. As a Zen master said, “Nothing is left
to you at this moment but to have a good laugh.”
In this moment the whole quality of consciousness is changed,
and I feel myself in a new world in which, however, it is obvious
that I have always been living. As soon as I recognize that my
voluntary and purposeful action happens spontaneously “by itself,”
just like breathing, hearing, and feeling, I am no longer caught in
the contradiction of trying to be spontaneous. There is no real
contradiction, since “trying” is “spontaneity.” Seeing this, the
compulsive, blocked, and “tied-up” feeling vanishes. It is just as if I
had been absorbed in a tug-of-war between my two hands, and had
forgotten that both were mine. No block to spontaneity remains
when the trying is seen to be needless. As we saw, the discovery
that both the voluntary and involuntary aspects of the mind are
alike spontaneous makes an immediate end of the fixed dualism
between the mind and the world, the knower and the known. The
new world in which I find myself has an extraordinary transparency
or freedom from barriers, making it seem that I have somehow
become the empty space in which everything is happening.
Here, then, is the point of the oft-repeated assertion that “all
beings are in nirvana from the very beginning,” that “all dualism is
falsely imagined,” that “the ordinary mind is the Tao” and that
there is therefore no meaning in trying to get into accord with it. In
the words of the Cheng-tao Ke:
Like the empty sky it has no boundaries,
Yet it is right in this place, ever profound and clear.
When you seek to know it, you cannot see it.
You cannot take hold of it,
But you cannot lose it.
In not being able to get it, you get it.
When you are silent, it speaks;
When you speak, it is silent.
The great gate is wide open to bestow alms,
And no crowd is blocking the way. (34)
It was through seeing this that, in the moment of his satori, Hakuin
cried out, “How wondrous! How wondrous! There is no birth-anddeath from which one has to escape, nor is there any supreme
knowledge after which one has to strive!” Or in the words of
Hsiang-yen:
At one stroke I forgot all my knowledge!
There’s no use for artificial discipline,
For, move as I will, I manifest the ancient Way.
Paradoxically, nothing is more artificial than the notion of
artificiality. Try as one may, it is as impossible to go against the
spontaneous Tao as to live in some other time than now, or some
other place than here. When a monk asked Bankei what he thought
of disciplining oneself to attain satori, the master said, “Satori
stands in contrast to confusion. Since each person is the substance of
Buddha, (in reality) there is not one point of confusion. What, then,
is one going to achieve by satori?”
Seeing, then, that there is no possibility of departing from the
Tao, one is like Hsüan-chüeh’s “easygoing” man who
Neither avoids false thoughts nor seeks the true,
For ignorance is in reality the Buddha nature,
And this illusory, changeful, empty body is the Dharmakaya.11
One stops trying to be spontaneous by seeing that it is unnecessary
to try, and then and there it can happen. The Zen masters often
bring out this state by the device of evading a question and then, as
the questioner turns to go, calling him suddenly by name. As he
naturally replies, “Yes?” the master exclaims, “There it is!”
To the Western reader it may seem that all this is a kind of
pantheism, an attempt to wipe out conAicts by asserting that
“everything is God.” But from the standpoint of Zen this is a long
way short of true naturalness since it involves the use of the
artificial concept–“everything is God” or “everything is the Tao.”
Zen annihilates this concept by showing that it is as unnecessary as
every other. One does not realize the spontaneous life by depending
on the repetition of thoughts or affirmations. One realizes it by
seeing that no such devices are necessary. Zen describes all means
and methods for realizing the Tao as “legs on a snake”–utterly
irrelevant attachments.
To the logician it will of course seem that the point at which we
have arrived is pure nonsense–as, in a way, it is. From the Buddhist
point of view, reality itself has no meaning since it is not a sign,
pointing to something beyond itself. To arrive at reality–at
“suchness”–is to go beyond karma, beyond consequential action,
and to enter a life which is completely aimless. Yet to Zen and
Taoism alike this is the very life of the universe, which is complete
at every moment and does not need to justify itself by aiming at
something beyond. In the words of a Zenrin poem:
If you don’t believe, just look at September, look at October!
The yellow leaves falling, falling, to fill both mountain and river.j
To see this is to be like the two friends of whom another Zenrin
poem says:
Meeting, they laugh and laugh–
The forest grove, the many fallen leaves!
To the Taoist mentality, the aimless, empty life does not suggest
anything depressing. On the contrary, it suggests the freedom of
clouds and mountain streams, wandering nowhere, of Aowers in
impenetrable canyons, beautiful for no one to see, and of the ocean
surf forever washing the sand, to no end.
Furthermore, the Zen experience is more of a conclusion than a
premise. It is never to be used as the first step in a line of ethical or
metaphysical reasoning, since conclusions draw to it rather than
from it. Like the Beatific Vision of Christianity, it is a “which than
which there is no whicher”–the true end of man–not a thing to be
used for some other end. Philosophers do not easily recognize that
there is a point where thinking-like boiling an egg-must come to a
stop. To try to formulate the Zen experience as a
proposition–“everything is the Tao”–and then to analyze it and
draw conclusions from it is to miss it completely. Like the
Crucifixion, it is “to the Jews [the moralists] a stum-blingblock and
to the Greeks [the logicians] foolishness.” To say that “everything is
the Tao” almost gets the point, but just at the moment of getting it,
the words crumble into nonsense. For we are here at a limit at
which words break down because they always imply a meaning
beyond themselves–and here there is no meaning beyond.
Zen does not make the mistake of using the experience “all things
are of one Suchness” as the premise for an ethic of universal
brotherhood. On the contrary, Yüan-wu says:
If you are a real man, you may by all means drive off with the
farmer’s ox, or grab the food from a starving man.
This is only to say that Zen lies beyond the ethical standpoint,
whose sanctions must be found, not in reality itself, but in the
mutual agreement of human beings. When we attempt to
universalize or absolutize it, the ethical standpoint makes it
impossible to exist, for we cannot live for a day without destroying
the life of some other creature.
If Zen is regarded as having the same function as a religion in the
West, we shall naturally want to find some logical connection
between its central experience and the improvement of human
relations. But this is actually putting the cart before the horse. The
point is rather that some such experience or way of life as this is
the object of improved human relations. In the culture of the Far
East the problems of human relations are the sphere of
Confucianism rather than Zen, but since the Sung dynasty (959–
1278) Zen has consistently fostered Confucianism and was the main
source of the introduction of its principles into Japan. It saw their
importance for creating the type of cultural matrix in which Zen
could Aourish without coming into conAict with social order,
because the Confucian ethic is admittedly human and relative, not
divine and absolute.
Although profoundly “inconsequential,” the Zen experience has
consequences in the sense that it may be applied in any direction,
to any conceivable human activity, and that wherever it is so
applied it lends an unmistakable quality to the work. The
characteristic notes of the spontaneous life are mo chih ch’u m or
“going ahead without hesitation,” wu-wei, which may here be
understood as purposelessness, and wu-shih, lack of affectation or
simplicity.
While the Zen experience does not imply any specific course of
action, since it has no purpose, no motivation, it turns
unhesitatingly to anything that presents itself to be done. Mo chih
ch’u is the mind functioning without blocks, without “wobbling”
between alternatives, and much of Zen training consists in
confronting the student with dilemmas which he is expected to
handle without stopping to deliberate and “choose.” The response
to the situation must follow with the immediacy of sound issuing
from the hands when they are clapped, or sparks from a flint when
struck. The student unaccustomed to this type of response will at
first be confused, but as he gains faith in his “original” or
spontaneous mind he will not only respond with ease, but the
responses themselves will acquire a startling appropriateness. This
is something like the professional comedian’s gift of unprepared
wit which is equal to any situation.
The master may begin a conversation with the student by asking
a series of very ordinary questions about trivial matters, to which
the student responds with perfect spontaneity. But suddenly he will
say, “When the bath-water Aows down the drain, does it turn
clockwise or counter-clockwise?” As the student stops at the
unexpectedness of the question, and perhaps tries to remember
which way it goes, the master shouts, “Don’t think! Act! This way–”
and whirls his hand in the air. Or, perhaps less helpfully, he may
say, “So far you’ve answered my questions quite naturally and
easily, but where’s your difficulty now?”
The student, likewise, is free to challenge the master, and one can
imagine that in the days when Zen training was less formal the
members of Zen communities must have had enormous fun laying
traps for each other. To some extent this type of relationship still
exists, despite the great solemnity of the sanzen interview in which
the koan is given and answered. The late Kozuki Roshi was
entertaining two American monks at tea when he casually asked,
“And what do you gentlemen know about Zen?” One of the monks
Aung his closed fan straight at the master’s face. All in the same
instant the master inclined his head slightly to one side, the fan shot
straight through the paper shoji behind him, and he burst into a
ripple of laughter.
Suzuki has translated a long letter from the Zen master Takuan
on the relationship of Zen to the art of fencing, and this is certainly
the best literary source of what Zen means by mo chih ch’u, by
“going straight ahead without stopping.” Both Takuan and Bankei
stressed the fact that the “original” or “unborn” mind is constantly
working miracles even in the most ordinary person. Even though a
tree has innumerable leaves, the mind takes them in all at once
without being “stopped” by any one of them. Explaining this to a
visiting monk, Bankei said, “To prove that your mind is the Buddha
mind, notice how all that I say here goes into you without missing a
single thing, even though I don’t try to push it into you.”14 When
heckled by an aggressive Nichiren monk who kept insisting that he
couldn’t understand a word, Bankei asked him to come closer. The
monk stepped forward, “Closer still,” said Bankei. The monk came
forward again. “How well,” said Bankei, “you understand me!” In
other words, our natural organism performs the most marvelously
complex activities without the least hesitation or deliberation.
Conscious thought is itself founded upon its whole system of
spontaneous functioning, for which reason there is really no
alternative to trusting oneself completely to its working. Oneself is
its working.
Zen is not merely a cult of impulsive action. The point of mo
chih ch’u is not to eliminate reAective thought but to eliminate
“blocking” in both action and thought, so that the response of the
mind is always like a ball in a mountain stream-“one thought after
another without hesitation.” There is something similar to this in
the psychoanalytic practice of free association, employed as a
technique to get rid of obstacles to the free flow of thought from the
“unconscious.” For there is a tendency to confuse “blocking”–a
purely obstructive mechanism–with thinking out an answer, but the
difference between the two is easily noticed in such a purely
“thinking out” process as adding a column of figures. Many people
find that at certain combinations of numbers, such as 8 and 5 or 7
and 6, a feeling of resistance comes up which halts the process.
Because it is always annoying and disconcerting, one tends also to
block at blocking, so that the state turns into the kind of wobbling
dither characteristic of the snarled feed-back system. The simplest
cure is to feel free to block, so that one does not block at blocking.
When one feels free to block, the blocking automatically eliminates
itself. It is like riding a bicycle. When one starts falling to the left,
one does not resist the fall (i.e., the block) by turning to the right.
One turns the wheel to the left–and the balance is restored. The
principle here is, of course, the same as getting out of the
contradiction of “trying to be spontaneous” through accepting the
“trying” as “spontaneous,” through not resisting the block.
“Blocking” is perhaps the best translation of the Zen term nien n
as it occurs in the phrase wu-nien, “no-thought” or, better, “no
second thought.” Takuan points out that this is the real meaning of
“attachment” in Buddhism, as when it is said that a Buddha is free
from worldly attachments. It does not mean that he is a “stone
Buddha” with no feelings, no emotions, and no sensations of hunger
or pain. It means that he does not block at anything. Thus it is
typical of Zen that its style of action has the strongest feeling of
commitment, of “follow-through.” It enters into everything
wholeheartedly and freely without having to keep an eye on itself.
It does not confuse spirituality with thinking about God while one
is peeling potatoes. Zen spirituality is just to peel the potatoes. In
the words of Lin-chi:
When it’s time to get dressed, put on your clothes. When you
must walk, then walk. When you must sit, then sit. Don’t have a
single thought in your mind about seeking for Buddhahood.…
You talk about being perfectly disciplined in your six senses and
in all your actions, but in my view all this is making karma. To
seek the Buddha (nature) and to seek the Dharma is at once to
m a k e karma which leads to the hells. To seek (to be)
Bodhisattvas is also making karma, and likewise studying the
sutras and commentaries. Buddhas and Patriarchs are people
without such artificialities.… It is said everywhere that there is a
Tao which must be cultivated and a Dharma which must be
realized. What Dharma do you say must be realized, and what
Tao cultivated? What do you lack in the way you are functioning
right now? What will you add to where you are?
As another Zenrin poem says:
There’s nothing equal to wearing clothes and eating food.
Outside this there are neither Buddhas nor Patríarchs.p
This is the quality of wu-shih, of naturalness without any
contrivances or means for being natural, such as thoughts of Zen, of
the Tao, or of the Buddha. One does not exclude such thoughts; they
simply fall away when seen to be unnecessary. “He does not linger
where the Buddha is, and where there is no Buddha he passes right
on.” For as the Zenrin says again:
To be conscious of the original mind, the original nature–
Just this is the great disease of Zen! 
As “the fish swims in the water but is unmindful of the water, the
bird Aies in the wind but knows not of the wind,” so the true life of
Zen has no need to “raise waves when no wind is blowing,” to drag
in religion or spirituality as something over and above life itself.
This is why the sage Fa-yung received no more offerings of Aowers
from the birds after he had had his interview with the Fourth
Patriarch, for his holiness no longer “stood out like a sore thumb.”
Of such a man the Zenrin says:
Entering the forest he moves not the grass;
Entering the water he makes not a ripple.
No one notices him because he does not notice himself.
It is often said that to be clinging to oneself is like having a thorn
in the skin, and that Buddhism is a second thorn to extract the first.
When it is out, both thorns are thrown away. But in the moment
when Buddhism, when philosophy or religion, becomes another
way of clinging to oneself through seeking a spiritual security, the
two thorns become one–and how is it to be taken out? This, as
Bankei said, is “wiping o? blood with blood.” Therefore in Zen
there is neither self nor Buddha to which one can cling, no good to
gain and no evil to be avoided, no thoughts to be eradicated and no
mind to be purified, no body to perish and no soul to be saved. At
one blow this entire framework of abstractions is shattered to
fragments. As the Zenrin says:
To save life it must be destroyed.
When utterly destroyed, one dwells for the first time
in peace.
One word settles heaven and earth;
One sword levels the whole world.
Of this “one sword” Lin-chi said:
If a man cultivates the Tao, the Tao will not work–on all sides
evil conditions will head up competitively. But when the sword
of wisdom [prajna] comes out there’s not one thing left.
The “sword of prajna” which cuts away abstraction is that “direct
pointing” whereby Zen avoids the entanglements of religiosity and
goes straight to the heart. Thus when the Governor of Lang asked
Yao-shan, “What is the Tao?” the master pointed upwards to the
sky and downwards to a water jug beside him. Asked for an
explanation, he replied: “A cloud in the sky and water in the jug.”
1 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 26.
2 I do not wish to press the analogy between the human mind and servo-mechanisms to
the point of saying that the mind-body is “nothing but” an extremely complicated
mechanical automaton. I only want to go so far as to show that feed-back involves some
problems which are similar to the problems of self-consciousness and self-control in
man. Otherwise, mechanism and organism seem to me to be different in principle–that
is, in their actual functioning–since the one is made and the other grown. The fact that
one can translate some organic processes into mechanical terms no more implies that
organism is mechanism than the translation of commerce into arithmetical terms
implies that commerce is arithmetic.
3 See the fascinating discussion of analogies between mechanical and logical
contradictions and the psychoneuroses by Gregory Bateson in Reusch and Bateson,
Communication: the Social Matrix of Psychiatry, esp. Chap. 8. (Norton; New York,
1950.)
4 In Suzuki (7), p. 80.
5 In Chu Ch’an (l), p. 29.
6 Bankei’s Daiho Shogen Kokushi Hogo. Japanese text edited by Furata and Suzuki.
(Tokyo, 1943.) Translation read to the author by Professor Hasegawa.
7 In Chu Ch’an (1), p. 24.
8 Orategama, in Suzuki (1), vol. 1, p. 239.
9 Wu-teng Hui-yüan, 9.
10 Bankei Kokushi Seppo. Read to the author by Professor Hasegawa.
11 Cheng-tao Ke, 1.
12 Comment on Pi-yen Lu, 3.
13 Suzuki (7), pp. 73–87. Excerpts from this letter also appear in Suzuki (1), vol. 3, pp.
318–19.
14 Bankei Kokushi Seppo. Read to the author by Professor Hasegawa.
15 In Suzuki (10), p. 123.
16 Lin-chi Lu in Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 1. 4. 6, 11–12, 12.
17 Shih Niu T’u, 8.
18 In Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 1. 4. 13.
Three
ZA-ZEN AND THE KOAN
There is a saying in Zen that “original realization is marvelous
practice” (Japanese, honsho myoshu a). The meaning is that no
distinction is to be made between the realization of awakening
(satori) and the cultivation of Zen in meditation and action.
Whereas it might be supposed that the practice of Zen is a means to
the end of awakening, this is not so. For the practice of Zen is not
the true practice so long as it has an end in view, and when it has
no end in view it is awakening–the aimless, self-su-cient life of the
“eternal now.” To practice with an end in view is to have one eye
on the practice and the other on the end, which is lack of
concentration, lack of sincerity. To put it in another way: one does
not practice Zen to become a Buddha; one practices it because one
is a Buddha from the beginning–and this “original realization” is the
starting point of the Zen life. Original realization is the “body” (t’i
b) and the marvelous practice the “use” (yung c), and the two
correspond respectively to prajna, wisdom, and karuna, the
compassionate activity of the awakened Bodhisattva in the world of
birth-and-death.
In the two preceding chapters we discussed the original
realization. In this and the one that follows we turn to the practice
or activity which 4ows from it–5rstly, to the life of meditation and,
secondly, to the life of everyday work and recreation.
We have seen that–whatever may have been the practice of the
Tang masters–the modern Zen communities, both Soto and Rinzai,
attach the highest importance to meditation or “sitting Zen” (zazen). It may seem both strange and unreasonable that strong and
intelligent men should simply sit still for hours on end. The
Western mentality feels that such things are not only unnatural but
Western mentality feels that such things are not only unnatural but
a great waste of valuable time, however useful as a discipline for
inculcating patience and fortitude. Although the West has its own
contemplative tradition in the Catholic Church, the life of “sitting
and looking” has lost its appeal, for no religion is valued which
does not “improve the world,” and it is hard to see how the world
can be improved by keeping still. Yet it should be obvious that
action without wisdom, without clear awareness of the world as it
really is, can never improve anything. Furthermore, as muddy water
is best cleared by leaving it alone, it could be argued that those who
sit quietly and do nothing are making one of the best possible
contributions to a world in turmoil.
There is, indeed, nothing unnatural in long periods of quiet
sitting. Cats do it; even dogs and other more nervous animals do it.
So-called primitive peoples do it–American Indians, and peasants of
almost all nations. The art is most di-cult for those who have
developed the sensitive intellect to such a point that they cannot
help making predictions about the future, and so must be kept in a
constant whirl of activity to forestall them. But it would seem that
to be incapable of sitting and watching with the mind completely at
rest is to be incapable of experiencing the world in which we live
to the full. For one does not know the world simply in thinking
about it and doing about it. One must 5rst experience it more
directly, and prolong the experience without jumping to
conclusions.
The relevance of za-zen to Zen is obvious when it is remembered
that Zen is seeing reality directly, in its “suchness.” To see the world
as it is concretely, undivided by categories and abstractions, one
must certainly look at it with a mind which is not thinking–which is
to say, forming symbols–about it. Za-zen is not, therefore, sitting
with a blank mind which excludes all the impressions of the inner
and outer senses. It is not “concentration” in the usual sense of
restricting the attention to a single sense object, such as a point of
light or the tip of one’s nose. It is simply a quiet awareness, without
comment, of whatever happens to be here and now. This awareness
is attended by the most vivid sensation of “nondifference” between
oneself and the external world, between the mind and its contents–
oneself and the external world, between the mind and its contents–
the various sounds, sights, and other impressions of the surrounding
environment. Naturally, this sensation does not arise by trying to
acquire it; it just comes by itself when one is sitting and watching
without any purpose in mind–even the purpose of getting rid of
purpose.
In the sodo or zendo, monks’ hall or meditation hall, of a Zen
community there is, of course, nothing particularly distracting in the
external surroundings. There is a long room with wide platforms
down either side where the monks both sleep and meditate. The
platforms are covered with tatami, thick floor-mats of straw, and
the monks sit in two rows facing one another across the room. The
silence which prevails is deepened rather than broken by occasional
sounds that float up from a near-by village, by the intermittent
ringing of soft-toned bells from other parts of the monastery, and by
the chatter of birds in the trees. Other than this there is only the feel
of the cold, clear mountain air and the “woody” smell of a special
kind of incense.
Much importance is attached to the physical posture of za-zen.
The monks sit on firmly padded cushions with legs crossed and feet
soles-upward upon the thighs. The hands rest upon the lap, the left
over the right, with palms upward and thumbs touching one
another. The body is held erect, though not stifly, and the eyes are
left open so that their gaze falls upon the 4oor a few feet ahead.
The breathing is regulated so as to be slow without strain, with the
stress upon the out-breath, and its impulse from the belly rather
than the chest. This has the erect of shifting the body’s center of
gravity to the abdomen so that the whole posture has a sense of
firmness, of being part of the ground upon which one is sitting. The
slow, easy breathing from the belly works upon the consciousness
like bellows, and gives it a still, bright clarity. The beginner is
advised to accustom himself to the stillness by doing nothing more
than counting his breaths from one to ten, over and over again,
until the sensation of sitting without comment becomes effortless
and natural.
While the monks are thus seated, two attendants walk slowly
back and forth along the floor between the platforms, each carrying
a keisaku or “warning” stick, round at one end and flattened at the
other–a symbol of the Bodhisattva Manjusri’s sword of prajna. As
soon as they see a monk going to sleep, or sitting in an incorrect
posture, they stop before him, bow ceremoniously, and beat him on
the shoulders. It is said that this is not “punishment” but an
“invigorating massage” to take the stiffness out of the shoulder
muscles and bring the mind back to a state of alertness. However,
monks with whom I have discussed this practice seem to have the
same wryly humorous attitude about it which one associates with
the usual corporal disciplines of boys’ boarding schools.
Furthermore, the sodo regulations say, “At the time of morning
service, the dozing ones are to be severely dealt with the keisaku.”
At intervals, the sitting posture is interrupted, and the monks fall
into ranks for a swift march around the floor between the platforms
to keep themselves from sluggishness. The periods of za-zen are
also interrupted for work in the monastery grounds, cleaning the
premises, services in the main shrine or “Buddha hall,” and other
duties–as well as for meals and short hours of sleep. At certain
times of year za-zen is kept up almost continuously from 3:30 a.m.
until 10 p.m., and these long periods are called sesshin, or
“collecting the mind.” Every aspect of the monks’ lives is conducted
according to a precise, though not ostentatious, ritual which gives
the atmosphere of the sodo a slightly military air. The rituals are
signaled and accompanied by about a dozen different kinds of bells,
clappers, and wooden gongs, struck in various rhythms to announce
the times for za-zen, meals, services, lectures, or sanzen interviews
with the master.
The ritualistic or ceremonious style is so characteristic of Zen that
it may need some explanation in a culture which has come to
associate it with affectation or superstition. In Buddhism the four
principal activities of man-walking, standing, sitting, and lying–are
called the four “dignities,” since they are the postures assumed by
the Buddha nature in its human (nirmanakaya) body. The ritualistic
style of conducting one’s everyday activities is therefore a
celebration of the fact that “the ordinary man is a Buddha,” and is,
furthermore, a style that comes almost naturally to a person who is
doing everything with total presence of mind. Thus if in something
so simple and trivial as lighting a cigarette one is fully aware,
seeing the flame, the curling smoke, and the regulation of the
breath as the most important things in the universe, it will seem to
an observer that the action has a ritualistic style.
This attitude of “acting as a Buddha” is particularly stressed in the
Soto School, where both za-zen and the round of daily activities are
not at all seen as means to an end but as the actual realization of
Buddhahood. As Dogen says in the Shobogenzo:
Without looking forward to tomorrow every moment, you must
think only of this day and this hour. Because tomorrow is di-cult
and un5xed and di-cult to know, you must think of following
the Buddhist way while you live today.… You must concentrate
on Zen practice without wasting time, thinking that there is only
this day and this hour. After that it becomes truly easy. You must
forget about the good and bad of your nature, the strength or
weakness of your power.
In za-zen there must be no thought either of aiming at satori or of
avoiding birth-and-death, no striving for anything in future time.
If life comes, this is life. If death comes, this is death. There is no
reason for your being under their control. Don’t put any hope in
them. This life and death are the life of the Buddha. If you try to
throw them away in denial, you lose the life of the Buddha.
The “three worlds” of past, present, and future are not, as is
commonly supposed, stretched out to inaccessible distances.
The so-called past is the top of the heart; the present is the top of
the fist; and the future is the back of the brain.
All time is here in this body, which is the body of Buddha. The past
exists in its memory and the future in its anticipation, and both of
these are now, for when the world is inspected directly and clearly
past and future times are nowhere to be found.
This is also the teaching of Bankei:
You are primarily Buddhas; you are not going to be Buddhas for
the first time. There is not an iota of a thing to be called error in
your inborn mind.… If you have the least desire to be better than
you actually are, if you hurry up to the slightest degree in search
of something, you are already going against the Unborn.
Such a view of Zen practice is therefore somewhat di-cult to
reconcile with the discipline which now prevails in the Rinzai
School, and which consists in “passing” a graduated series of
approximately fifty koan problems. Many of the Rinzai masters are
most emphatic about the necessity of arousing a most intense spirit
of seeking–a compelling sense of “doubt” whereby it becomes
almost impossible to forget the koan one is trying to solve.
Naturally, this leads to a good deal of comparison between the
degrees of attainment of various individuals, and a very definite and
formal recognition is attached to 5nal “graduation” from the
process.
Since the formal details of the koan discipline are one of the few
actual secrets remaining in the Buddhist world, it is di-cult to
appraise it fairly if one has not undergone the training. On the
other hand, if one has undergone it one is obliged not to talk about
it–save in vague generalities. The Rinzai School has always
forbidden the publication of formally acceptable answers to the
various koan because the whole point of the discipline is to
discover them for oneself, by intuition. To know the answers
without having so discovered them would be like studying the map
without taking the journey. Lacking the actual shock of recognition,
the bare answers seem flat and disappointing, and obviously no
competent master would be deceived by anyone who gave them
without genuine feeling.
There is no reason, however, why the process should actually
involve all the silliness about “grades of attainment,” about who has
“passed” and who has not, or about who is or is not a “genuine”
Buddha by these formal standards. All well-established religious
institutions are beset by this kind of nonsense, and they generally
boil down to a kind of aestheticism, an excessive passion for the
cultivation of a special “style” whose refinements distinguish the
sheep from the goats. By such standards the liturgical aesthete can
distinguish Roman from Anglican Catholic priests, confusing the
mannerisms of traditional atmosphere with the supernatural marks
of true or false participation in the apostolic succession. Sometimes,
however, the cultivation of a traditional style may be rather
admirable, as when a school of craftsmen or artists hands down
from generation to generation certain trade secrets or technical
re5nements whereby objects of peculiar beauty are manufactured.
Even so, this very easily becomes a rather affected and selfconscious discipline, and at that moment all its “Zen” is lost.
The koan system as it exists today is largely the work of Hakuin
(1685–1768), a formidable and immensely versatile master, who
gave it a systematic organization so that the complete course of Zen
study in the Rinzai School is divided into six stages. There are, first,
five groups of koan d:
1. Hosshin, or Dharmakaya koan, whereby one “enters into the
frontier gate of Zen.”
2. Kikan, or “cunning barrier” koan, having to do with the active
expression of the state realized in the first group.
3. Gonsen, or “investigation of words” koan, presumably having
to do with the expression of Zen understanding in speech.
4. Nanto, or “hard to penetrate” koan.
5. Goi, or “Five Ranks” koan, based on the five relationships of
“lord” and “servant” or of “principle” (li) and “thing-event” (shih),
wherein Zen is related to the Hua-yen or Avatamsaka philosophy.
The sixth stage is a study of the Buddhist precepts and the
regulations of the monk’s life (vinaya) in the light of Zen
understanding.
Normally, this course of training takes about thirty years. By no
means all Zen monks complete the whole training. This is required
only of those who are to receive their master’s inka or “seal of
approval” so that they themselves may become masters (roshi),
thoroughly versed in all the “skillful means” (upaya) for teaching
Zen to others. Like so many other things of this kind, the system is
as good as one makes it, and its graduates are both tall Buddhas and
short Buddhas. It should not be assumed that a person who has
passed a koan, or even many koan, is necessarily a “transformed”
human being whose character and way of life are radically different
from what they were before. Nor should it be assumed that satori is
a single, sudden leap from the common consciousness to “complete,
unexcelled awakening” (anuttara samyak sambodhi). Satori really
designates the sudden and intuitive way of seeing into anything,
whether it be remembering a forgotten name or seeing into the
deepest principles of Buddhism. One seeks and seeks, but cannot
5nd. One then gives up, and the answer comes by itself. Thus there
may be many occasions of satori in the course of training, great
satori and little satori, and the solution of many of the koan
depends upon nothing more sensational than a kind of “knack” for
understanding the Zen style of handling Buddhist principles.
Western ideas of Buddhist attainments are all too often distorted
by the “mysterious East” approach, and by the sensational fantasies
so widely circulated in theosophical writings during the decades
just before and after the turn of the century. Such fantasies were
based not upon a 5rst-hand study of Buddhism but on literal
readings of mythological passages in the sutras, where the Buddhas
and Bodhisattvas are embellished with innumerable miraculous and
superhuman attributes. Thus there must be no confusion between
Zen masters and theosophical “mahatmas”–the glamorous “Masters
of Wisdom” who live in the mountain fastnesses of Tibet and
practice the arts of occultism. Zen masters are quite human. They
get sick and die; they know joy and sorrow; they have bad tempers
or other little “weaknesses” of character just like anyone else, and
they are not above falling in love and entering into a fully human
relationship with the opposite sex. The perfection of Zen is to be
perfectly and simply human. The difference of the adept in Zen
from the ordinary run of men is that the latter are, in one way or
another, at odds with their own humanity, and are attempting to be
angels or demons. A doka poem by Ikkyu says:
We eat, excrete, sleep, and get up;
This is our world.
All we have to do after that–
Is to die.
Koan training involves typically Asian concepts of the relation
between master and pupil which are quite unlike ours. For in Asian
cultures this is a peculiarly sacred relationship in which the master
is held to become responsible for the karma of the pupil. The
pupil, in turn, is expected to accord absolute obedience and
authority to the master, and to hold him in almost higher respect
than his own father–and in Asian countries this is saying a great
deal. To a young Zen monk the roshi therefore stands as a symbol
of the utmost patriarchal authority, and he usually plays the role to
perfection–being normally a man advanced in years, fierce and
“tigerish” in aspect, and, when formally robed and seated for the
sanzen interview, a person of supreme presence and dignity. In this
role he constitutes a living symbol of everything that makes one
afraid of being spontaneous, everything that prompts the most
painful and awkward self-consciousness. He assumes this role as an
upaya, a skillful device, for challenging the student to 5nd enough
“nerve” to be perfectly natural in the presence of this formidable
archetype. If he can do this, he is a free man whom no one on earth
can embarrass. It must be borne in mind, too, that in Japanese
culture the adolescent and the youth are peculiarly susceptible to
ridicule, which is freely used as a means of conforming the young to
social convention.
To the normal Asian concept of the master-pupil relationship,
Zen adds something of its own in the sense that it leaves the
formation of the relationship entirely to the initiative of the pupil.
The basic position of Zen is that it has nothing to say, nothing to
teach. The truth of Buddhism is so self-evident, so obvious that it is,
if anything, concealed by explaining it. Therefore the master does
not “help” the student in any way, since helping would actually be
hindering. On the contrary, he goes out of his way to put obstacles
and barriers in the student’s path. Thus Wu-men’s comments on the
various koan in the Wu-men kuan are intentionally misleading, the
koan as a whole are called “wisteria vines” or “entanglements,” and
particular groups “cunning barriers” (kikan) and “hard to
penetrate” (nanto). This is like encouraging the growth of a hedge
by pruning, for obviously the basic intention is to help, but the Zen
student does not really know Zen unless he 5nds it out for himself.
The Chinese proverb “What comes in through the gate is not family
treasure” is understood in Zen to mean that what someone else tells
you is not your own knowledge. Satori, as Wu-men explained,
comes only after one has exhausted one’s thinking, only when one
is convinced that the mind cannot grasp itself. In the words of
another of Ikkyu’s doka:
A mind to search elsewhere
For the Buddha,
Is foolishness
In the very centre of foolishness.
For
My self of long ago,
In nature non-existent;
Nowhere to go when dead,
Nothing at all.
The preliminary hosshin type of koan begins, therefore, to
obstruct the student by sending him off in the direction exactly
opposite to that in which he should look. Only it does it rather
cleverly, so as to conceal the stratagem. Everyone knows that the
Buddha nature is “within” oneself and is not to be sought outside,
so that no student would be fooled by being told to seek it by going
to India or by reading a certain sutra. On the contrary, he is told to
look for it in himself! Worse still, he is encouraged to seek it with
the whole energy of his being, never giving up his quest by day or
night, whether actually in za-zen or whether working or eating. He
is encouraged, in fact, to make a total fool of himself, to whirl
round and round like a dog trying to catch up with its own tail.
Thus normal 5rst koan are Hui-neng’s “Original Face,” Chaochou’s “Wu,” or Hakuin’s “One Hand.” At the first sanzen interview,
the roshi instructs the reluctantly accepted student to discover his
“original face” or “aspect,” that is, his basic nature, as it was before
his father and mother conceived him. He is told to return when he
has discovered it, and to give some proof of discovery. In the
meantime he is under no circumstance to discuss the problem with
others or to seek their help. Joining the other monks in the sodo,
the jikijitsu or “head monk” will probably instruct him in the
rudiments of za-zen, showing him how to sit, and perhaps
encouraging him to return to the roshi for sanzen as soon as
possible, and to lose no opportunity for getting the proper view of
his koan. Pondering the problem of his “original face,” he therefore
tries and tries to imagine what he was before he was born, or, for
that matter, what he now is at the very center of his being, what is
the basic reality of his existence apart from his extension in time
and space.
He soon discovers that the roshi has no patience whatever with
philosophical or other wordy answers. For the roshi wants to be
“shown.” He wants something concrete, some solid proof. The
student therefore begins to produce such “specimens of reality” as
lumps of rock, leaves and branches, shouts, gestures of the hands–
anything and everything he can imagine. But all is resolutely
rejected until the student, unable to imagine anything more, is
brought to his wits’ end–at which point he is of course beginning to
get on the right track. He “knows that he doesn’t know.”
When the beginning koan is Chao-chou’s “Wu,” the student is
asked to 5nd out why Chao-chou answered “Wu” or “None” to the
question, “Does a dog have the Buddha nature?” The roshi asks to
be shown this “nothing.” A Chinese proverb says that “A single
hand does not make a clap,” e and therefore Hakuin asked, “What is
the sound of one hand?” Can you hear what is not making a noise?
Can you get any sound out of this one object which has nothing to
hit? Can you get any “knowledge” of your own real nature? What
an idiotic question!
By such means the student is at last brought to a point of feeling
completely stupid–as if he were encased in a huge block of ice,
unable to move or think. He just knows nothing; the whole world,
including himself, is an enormous mass of pure doubt. Everything
he hears, touches, or sees is as incomprehensible as “nothing” or
“the sound of one hand.” At sanzen he is perfectly dumb. He walks
or sits all day in a “vivid daze,” conscious of everything going on
around him, responding mechanically to circumstances, but totally
baffled by everything.
After some time in this state there comes a moment when the
block of ice suddenly collapses, when this vast lump of
unintelligibility comes instantly alive. The problem of who or what
it is becomes transparently absurd–a question which, from the
beginning, meant nothing whatever. There is no one left to ask
himself the question or to answer it. Yet at the same time this
transparent meaninglessness can laugh and talk, eat and drink, run
up and down, look at the earth and sky, and all this without any
sense of there being a problem, a sort of psychological knot, in the
midst of it. There is no knot because the “mind seeking to know the
mind” or the “self seeking to control the self” has been defeated out
of existence and exposed for the abstraction which it always was.
And when that tense knot vanishes there is no more sensation of a
hard core of selfhood standing over against the rest of the world. In
this state, the roshi needs only a single look at the student to know
that he is now ready to begin his Zen training in earnest.
It is not quite the paradox which it seems to say that Zen training
can begin only when it has been 5nished. For this is simply the
basic Mahayana principle that prajna leads to karuna, that
awakening is not truly attained unless it also implies the life of the
Bodhisattva, the manifestation of the “marvelous use” of the Void
for the benefit of all sentient beings.
At this point the roshi begins to present the student with koan
which ask for impossible feats of action or judgment, such as:
“Take the four divisions of Tokyo out of your sleeve.”
“Stop that ship on the distant ocean.”
“Stop the booming of the distant bell.”
“A girl is crossing the street. Is she the younger or the older
sister?”
Such koan are rather more obviously “tricky” than the basic
introductory problems, and show the student that what are
dilemmas for thought present no barriers to action. A paper
handkerchief easily becomes the four divisions of Tokyo, and the
student solves the problem of the younger or older sister by
mincing across the room like a girl. For in her absolute “suchness”
the girl is just that; she is only relatively “sister,” “older,” or
“younger.” One can perhaps understand why a man who had
practiced za-zen for eight years told R. H. Blyth that “Zen is just a
trick of words,” for on the principle of extracting a thorn with a
thorn Zen is extricating people from the tangle in which they 5nd
themselves from confusing words and ideas with reality.
The continued practice of za-zen now provides the student with a
clear, unobstructed mind into which he can toss the koan like a
pebble into a pool and simply watch to see what his mind does
with it. As he concludes each koan, the roshi usually requires that
he present a verse from the Zenrin Kushu which expresses the point
of the koan just solved. Other books are also used, and the late
Sokei-an Sasaki, working in the United States, found that an
admirable manual for this purpose was Alice in Wonderland!. As
the work goes on, crucial koan alternate with subsidiary koan
which explore the implications of the former, and give the student
a thorough working acquaintance with every theme in the Buddhist
view of the universe, presenting the whole body of understanding
in such a way that he knows it in his bones and nerves. By such
means he learns to respond with it instantly and unwaveringly in
the situations of everyday life.
The final group of koan are concerned with the “Five Ranks” (goi)–a schematic view of the relations between relative knowledge
and absolute knowledge, thing-events (shih) and underlying
principle (li). The originator of the scheme was T’ung-shan (807–
869), but it arises from the contacts of Zen with the Hua-yen
(Japanese, Kegon) School, and the doctrine of the Five Ranks is
closely related to that of the fourfold Dharmadhatu.10 The Ranks
are often represented in terms of the relative positions of lord and
servant or host and guest, standing respectively for the underlying
principle and the thing-events. Thus we have:
1. The lord looks down at the servant.
2. The servant looks up at the lord.
3. The lord.
4. The servant.
5. The lord and the servant converse together.
Su-ce it to say that the first four correspond to the four
Dharmadhatu of the Hua-yen School, though the relationship is
somewhat complex, and the fifth to “naturalness,” In other words,
one may regard the universe, the Dharmadhatu, from a number of
equally valid points of view–as many, as one, as both one and
many, and as neither one nor many. But the 5nal position of Zen is
that it does not take any special viewpoint, and yet is free to take
every viewpoint according to the circumstances. In the words of
Lin-chi:
Sometimes I take away the man (i.e., the subject) but do not take
away the circumstances (i.e., the object). Sometimes I take away
the circumstances but do not take away the man. Sometimes I
take away both the man and the circumstances. Sometimes I take
away neither the man nor the circumstances.
And sometimes, he might have added, I just do nothing special (wushih).
Koan training comes to its conclusion in the stage of perfect
naturalness of freedom in both the absolute and the relative worlds,
but because this freedom is not opposed to the conventional order,
but is rather a freedom which “upholds the world” (lokasamgraha),
the 5nal phase of study is the relationship of Zen to the rules of
social and monastic life. As Yun-men once asked, “In such a wide
world, why answer the bell and put on ceremonial robes?”
Another master’s answer in quite a different context applies well
here–“If there is any reason for it you may cut off my head!” For the
moral act is signi5cantly moral only when it is free, without the
compulsion of a reason or necessity. This is also the deepest
meaning of the Christian doctrine of free will, for to act “in union
with God” is to act, not from the constraint of fear or pride, nor
from hope of reward, but with the baseless love of the “unmoved
mover.”
To say that the koan system has certain dangers or drawbacks is
only to say that anything can be misused. It is a highly sophisticated
and even institutionalized technique, and therefore lends itself to
affectation and artificiality. But so does any technique, even when
so untechnical as Bankei’s method of no method. This, too, can
become a fetish. Yet it is important to be mindful of the points at
which the drawbacks are most likely to arise, and it would seem
that in koan training there are two.
The 5rst is to insist that the koan is the “only way” to a genuine
realization of Zen. Of course, one may beg the question by saying
that Zen, over and above the experience of awakening, is precisely
the style of handling Buddhism which the koan embody. But in this
case the Soto School is not Zen, and no Zen is to be found anywhere
in the world outside the particular tradition of the Rinzai branch. So
de5ned, Zen has no universality and becomes as exotic and
culturally conditioned as No drama or the practice of Chinese
calligraphy. From the standpoint of the West, such Zen will appeal
only to fanciers of “Nipponery,” to romanticists who like to play at
being Japanese. Not that there is anything inherently “bad” in such
romanticism, for there are no such things as “pure” cultures, and the
borrowing of other people’s styles always adds to the variety and
spice of life. But Zen is so much more than a cultural refinement.
The second, and more serious, drawback can arise from the
opposition of satori to the intense “feeling of doubt” which some
koan exponents so deliberately encourage. For this is to foster a
dualistic satori. To say that the depth of the satori is proportional to
the intensity of seeking and striving which precede it is to confuse
satori with its purely emotional adjuncts. In other words, if one
wants to feel exhilaratingly light-footed, it is always possible to go
around for some time with lead in one’s shoes–and then take the
off. The sense of relief will certainly be proportional to the length
of time such shoes have been worn, and to the weight of the lead.
This is equivalent to the old trick of religious revivalists who give
their followers a tremendous emotional uplift by first implanting an
acute sense of sin, and then relieving it through faith in Jesus. But
such “uplifts” do not last, and it was of such a satori that Yün-feng
said, “That monk who has any satori goes right into hell like a
flying arrow.”
Awakening almost necessarily involves a sense of relief because it
brings to an end the habitual psychological cramp of trying to grasp
the mind with the mind, which in turn generates the ego with all its
conflicts and defenses. In time, the sense of relief wears off–but not
the awakening, unless one has confused it with the sense of relief
and has attempted to exploit it by indulging in ecstasy. Awakening
is thus only incidentally pleasant or ecstatic, only at first an
experience of intense emotional release. But in itself it is just the
ending of an artificial and absurd use of the mind. Above and
beyond that it is wu-shih–nothing special–since the ultimate content
of awakening is never a particular object of knowledge or
experience. The Buddhist doctrine of the “Four Invisibles” is that
the Void (sunya) is to a Buddha as water to a fish, air to a man, and
the nature of things to the deluded–beyond conception.
It should be obvious that what we are, most substantially and
fundamentally, will never be a distinct object of knowledge.
Whatever we can know–life and death, light and darkness, solid and
empty–will be the relative aspects of something as inconceivable as
the color of space. Awakening is not to know what this reality is. As
a Zenrin poem says:
As butterflies come to the newly planted flowers,
Bodhidharma says, “I know not.”
Awakening is to know what reality is not. It is to cease identifying
oneself with any object of knowledge whatsoever. Just as every
assertion about the basic substance or energy of reality must be
meaningless, any assertion as to what “I am” at the very roots of my
being must also be the height of folly. Delusion is the false
metaphysical premise at the root of common sense; it is the average
man’s unconscious ontology and epistemology, his tacit assumption
that he is a “something.” The assumption that “I am nothing”
would, of course, be equally wrong since something and nothing,
being and non-being, are related concepts, and belong equally to
the “known.”
One method of muscular relaxation is to begin by increasing
tension in the muscles so as to have a clear feeling of what not to
do.15 In this sense there is some point in using the initial koan as a
means of intensifying the mind’s absurd effort to grasp itself. But to
identify satori with the consequent feeling of relief, with the sense
of relaxation, is quite misleading, for the satori is the letting go and
not the feeling of it. The conscious aspect of the Zen life is not,
therefore, satori–not the “original mind”-but everything one is left
free to do and to see and feel when the cramp in the mind has been
released.
From this standpoint Bankei’s simple trust in the “Unborn mind”
and even Shinran’s view of Nembutsu are also entrances to satori.
To “let go” it is not always necessary to wear out the attempt to
grasp until it becomes intolerable. As against this violent way there
is also a judo–a. “gentle way,” the way of seeing that the mind, the
basic reality, remains spontaneous and ungrasped whether one tries
to grasp it or not. One’s own doing or not doing drop away by
sheer irrelevance. To think that one must grasp or not grasp, let go
or not let go, is only to foster the illusion that the ego is real, and
that its machinations are an effective obstacle to the Tao. Beside the
spontaneous functioning of the “Unborn mind” these efforts or nonefforts are strictly null. In the more imagistic language of Shinran,
one has only to hear of the “saving vow” of Amitabha and to say his
Name, the Nembutsu, even just once without concern as to whether
one has faith or not, or as to whether one is desireless or not. All
such concern is the pride of the ego. In the words of the Shin-shu
mystic Kichi-bei:
When all the idea of self-power based upon moral values and
disciplinary measures is purged, there is nothing left in you that
will declare itself to be the hearer, and just because of this you do
not miss anything you hear.16
So long as one thinks about listening, one cannot hear clearly, and
so long as one thinks about trying or not trying to let go of oneself,
one cannot let go. Yet whether one thinks about listening or not,
the ears are hearing just the same, and nothing can stop the sound
from reaching them.
The advantage of the koan method is perhaps that, for general
purposes, the other way is too subtle, and too easily subject to
misinterpretation–especially by monks who might all too readily
use it as an excuse for loafing around the monastery while living off
the donations of the devout laity. This is almost certainly why the
emphasis of the T’ang masters on “not-seeking” gave way to the
more energetic use of the koan as a means of exhausting the
strength of the egoistic will. Bankei’s Zen without method or means
offers no basis for a school or institution, since the monks may just
as well go their way and take up farming or 5shing. As a result no
external sign of Zen is left; there is no longer any 5nger pointing at
the moon of Truth–and this is necessary for the Bodhisattva’s task of
delivering all beings, even though it runs the risk of mistaking the
finger for the moon.
1 In Suzuki (5), p. 99. The regulations also say, “When submitting to the keisaku,
courteously fold your hands and bow; do not permit any egoistic thoughts to assert
themselves and cherish anger.” The point seems to be that the keisaku has two uses–one
for shoulder massage and another, however politely worded, for punishment. It is of
interest that Bankei abolished this practice in his own community, on the ground that a
man is no less a Buddha when asleep than when awake.
2 Zuimonki chapter. In Masunaga (1), p. 42.
3 Shop chapter. Ibid., p. 44.
4 Kenbutsu chapter. Ibid., p. 45.
5 In Suzuki (10), pp. 177–78.
6 This outline is based on information given in a conference at the American Academy
of Asian Studies by Ruth Sasaki.
7 One can hardly exaggerate the importance of the great Buddhist symbol of the
bhavachakra, the Wheel Becoming. The angels and demons occupy the highest and
lowest positions, the positions of perfect happiness and perfect frustration. These
positions lie on the opposite sides of a circle because they lead to each other. They
represent not so much literal beings as our own ideals and terrors, since the Wheel is
actually a map of the human mind. The human position lies in the middle, i.e., at the
left of the Wheel, and it is only from this position that one may become a Buddha.
Human birth is therefore regarded as unusually fortunate, but this is not to be confused
with the physical event, for one is not actually “born into the human world” until one
has fully accepted one’s humanity.
8 Translated by R. H. Blyth in “Ikkyu’s Doka,” The Young East, vol. 2, no. 7. (Tokyo,
1953.)
9 R. H. BIyth, ibid., vol. 3, no. 9, p. 14, and vol. 2, no. 2, p. 7.
10 For details, see above, pp. 160f.
11 In Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 1. 4, pp. 3–4.
12 A detailed but extremely confusing account of the Five Ranks will be found in
Dumoulin and Sasaki (1), pp. 25–29.
13 Wu-men kuan, 16.
14 Ku-tsun-hsü Yü-lu, 41.
15 See Edmund Jacobson, Progressive Relaxation. (Chicago, 1938.)
16 In Suzuki (10), p. 130.
Four
ZEN IN THE ARTS
Happily, it is possible for us not only to hear about Zen but also to
see it. Since “one showing is worth a hundred sayings,” the
expression of Zen in the arts gives us one of the most direct ways of
understanding it. This is the more so because the art forms which
Zen has created are not symbolic in the same way as other types of
Buddhist art, or as is “religious” art as a whole. The favorite subjects
of Zen artists, whether painters or poets, are what we should call
natural, concrete, and secular things. Even when they turn to the
Buddha, or to the Patriarchs and masters of Zen, they depict them in
a peculiarly down-to-earth and human way. Furthermore, the arts
of Zen are not merely or primarily representational. Even in
painting, the work of art is considered not only as representing
nature but as being itself a work of nature. For the very technique
involves the art of artlessness, or what Sabro Hasegawa has called
the “controlled accident,” so that paintings are formed as naturally
as the rocks and grasses which they depict.
This does not mean that the art forms of Zen are left to mere
chance, as if one were to dip a snake in ink and let it wiggle
around on a sheet of paper. The point is rather that for Zen there is
no duality, no con,ict between the natural element of chance and
the human element of control. The constructive powers of the
human mind are no more arti-cial than the formative actions of
plants or bees, so that from the standpoint of Zen it is no
contradiction to say that artistic technique is discipline in
spontaneity and spontaneity in discipline.
The art forms of the Western world arise from spiritual and
philosophical traditions in which spirit is divided from nature, and
comes down from heaven to work upon it as an intelligent energy
upon an inert and recalcitrant stuff. Thus Malraux speaks always of
the artist “conquering” his medium as our explorers and scientists
also speak of conquering mountains or conquering space. To
Chinese and Japanese ears these are grotesque expressions. For
when you climb it is the mountain as much as your own legs which
lifts you upwards, and when you paint it is the brush, ink, and
paper which determine the result as much as your own hand.
Taoism, Confucianism, and Zen are expressions of a mentality
which feels completely at home in this universe, and which sees
man as an integral part of his environment. Human intelligence is
not an imprisoned spirit from afar but an aspect of the whole
intricately balanced organism of the natural world, whose
principles were -rst explored in the Book of Changes. Heaven and
earth are alike members of this organism, and nature is as much our
father as our mother, since the Tao by which it works is originally
manifested in the yang and the yin–the male and female, positive
and negative principles which, in dynamic balance, maintain the
order of the world. The insight which lies at the root of Far Eastern
culture is that opposites are relational and so fundamentally
harmonious. Con,ict is always comparatively superficial, for there
can be no ultimate con,ict when the pairs of opposites are
mutually interdependent. Thus our stark divisions of spirit and
nature, subject and object, good and evil, artist and medium are
quite foreign to this culture.
In a universe whose fundamental principle is relativity rather
than warfare there is no purpose because there is no victory to be
won, no end to be attained. For every end, as the word itself shows,
is an extreme, an opposite, and exists only in relation to its other
end. Because the world is not going anywhere there is no hurry.
One may as well “take it easy” like nature itself, and in the Chinese
language the “changes” of nature and “ease” are the same word, i.a
This is a first principle in the study of Zen and of any Far Eastern
art: hurry, and all that it involves, is fatal. For there is no goal to be
attained. The moment a goal is conceived it becomes impossible to
practice the discipline of the art, to master the very rigor of its
technique. Under the watchful and critical eye of a master one may
practice the writing of Chinese characters for days and days, months
and months. But he watches as a gardener watches the growth of a
tree, and wants his student to have the attitude of the tree–the
attitude of purposeless growth in which there are no short cuts
because every stage of the way is both beginning and end. Thus the
most accomplished master no more congratulates himself upon
“arriving” than the most fumbling beginner.
Paradoxical as it may seem, the purposeful life has no content, no
point. It hurries on and on, and misses everything. Not hurrying, the
purposeless life misses nothing, for it is only when there is no goal
and no rush that the human senses are fully open to receive the
world. Absence of hurry also involves a certain lack of interference
with the natural course of events, especially when it is felt that the
natural course follows principles which are not foreign to human
intelligence. For, as we have seen, the Taoist mentality makes, or
forces, nothing but “grows” everything. When human reason is seen
to be an expression of the same spontaneous balance of yang and
yin as the natural universe, man’s action upon his environment is
not felt as a conflict, an action from outside. Thus the difference
between forcing and growing cannot be expressed in terms of
specific directions as to what should or should not be done, for the
difference lies primarily in the quality and feeling of the action. The
diffculty of describing these things for Western ears is that people
in a hurry cannot feel.
The expression of this whole attitude in the arts is perhaps best
approached through painting and poetry. Although it may seem
that: the arts of Zen are con-ned to the more refined expressions of
culture, it should be remembered that almost every profession and
craft is known in Japan as a do, that is, a Tao or Way, not unlike
what used to be known in the West as a “mystery.” To some extent,
every do was at one time a lay method of learning the principles
which are embodied in Taoism, Zen, and Confucianism, even as
modern Masonry is a survival from times when the craft of the
mason was a means of initiation into a spiritual tradition. Even in
modern Osaka some of the older merchants follow a do or way of
commerce based upon shingaku–a system of psychology closely
related to Zen.
After the persecution of Chinese Buddhism in 845, Zen was for
some time not only the dominant form of Buddhism but also the
most powerful spiritual in,uence in the growth of Chinese culture.
This in,uence was at its height during the Southern Sung dynasty
(1127–1279), and during this time the Zen monasteries became
leading centers of Chinese scholarship. Lay scholars, Confucian and
Taoist alike, visited them for periods of study, and Zen monks in
turn familiarized themselves with Chinese classical studies. Since
writing and poetry were among the chief preoccupations of Chinese
scholars, and since the Chinese way of painting is closely akin to
writing, the roles of scholar, artist, and poet were not widely
separated. The Chinese gentleman-scholar was not a specialist, and
it was quite against the nature of the Zen monk to con-ne his
interests and activities to purely “religious” affairs. The result was a
tremendous cross-fertilization of philosophical, scholarly, poetic,
and artistic pursuits in which the Zen and Taoist feeling for
“naturalness” became the dominant note. It was during this same
period that Eisai and Dogen came from Japan to return with Zen to
their own country, to be followed by an incessant stream of
Japanese scholar-monks eager to take home not only Zen but every
other aspect of Chinese culture. Shiploads of monks, amounting
almost to ,oating monasteries, plied between China and Japan,
carrying not only sutras and Chinese classical books, but also tea,
silk, pottery, incense, paintings, drugs, musical instruments, and
every re-nement of Chinese culture–not to mention Chinese artists
and craftsmen.
Closest to the feeling of Zen was a calligraphic style of painting,
done with black ink on paper or silk-usually a painting and poem
in one. Chinese black ink is capable of a great variety of tones,
varied by the amount of water, and the ink itself is found in an
enormous number of qualities and “colors” of black. The ink comes
in a solid stick, and is prepared by pouring a little water into a flat
stone dish, upon which the stick is rubbed until the liquid is of the
required density. Writing or painting is done with a sharply pointed
brush set in a bamboo stem–a brush which is held upright without
resting the wrist on the paper, and whose soft hairs give its strokes
a great versatility. Since the touch of the brush is so light and ,uid,
and since it must move continuously over the absorbent paper if the
ink is to ,ow out regularly, its control requires a free movement of
the hand and arm as if one were dancing rather than writing on
paper. In short, it is a perfect instrument for the expression of
unhesitating spontaneity, and a single stroke is enough to “give
away” one’s character to an experienced observer.
Sumi-e, as the Japanese call this style of painting, may have been
perfected as early as the Tang dynasty by the almost legendary
masters Wu Tao-tzu (c. 700–760) and Wang-wei (c. 698–759).
However, the authenticity of works ascribed to them is doubtful,
though they may be as early as the ninth century and include a
painting so fully characteristic of Zen as the impressionistic
waterfall attributed to Wang-wei–a thundering stream of sheer
power, suggested by a few slightly curved sweeps of the brush
between two masses of rock. The great formative age of this style
was undoubtedly the Sung dynasty (959–1279), and is represented
by such painters as Hsia-kuei, Ma-yüan, Mu-ch’i, and Liang-k’ai.
The Sung masters were pre-eminently landscape painters,
creators of a tradition of “nature painting” which has hardly been
surpassed anywhere in the world. For it shows us the life of nature–
of mountains, waters, mists, rocks, trees, and birds–as felt by Taoism
and Zen. It is a world to which man belongs but which he does not
dominate; it is suffcient to itself, for it was not “made for” anyone
and has no purpose of its own. As Hsüan-chüeh said:
Over the river, the shining moon; in the pine trees, sighing wind;
All night long so tranquil–why? And for whom?
Sung landscapes are by no means as fantastic and stylized as
Western critics often suggest, for to travel in similar territory, in
mountainous, misty country, is to see them at every turn of the
road, and it is a simple matter for the photographer to take pictures
which look exactly like Chinese paintings. One of the most striking
features of the Sung landscape, as of sumi-e as a whole, is the
relative emptiness of the picture–an emptiness which appears,
however, to be part of the painting and not just unpainted
background. By filling in just one corner, the artist makes the whole
area of the picture alive. Ma-yüan, in particular, was a master of
this technique, which amounts almost to “painting by not painting,”
or what Zen sometimes calls “playing the string-less lute.” The
secret lies in knowing how to balance form with emptiness and,
above all, in knowing when one has “said” enough. For Zen spoils
neither the aesthetic shock nor the satori shock by filling in, by
explanation, second thoughts, and intellectual commentary.
Furthermore, the figure so integrally related to its empty space
gives the feeling of the “marvelous Void” from which the event
suddenly appears.
Equally impressive is the mastery of the brush, of strokes ranging
from delicate elegance to rough vitality, from minutely detailed
trees to bold outlines and masses given texture by the “controlled
accidents” of stray brush hairs and uneven inking of the paper. Zen
artists have preserved this technique to the present day in the socalled zenga style of Chinese characters, circles, bamboo branches,
birds, or human -gures drawn with these uninhibited, powerful
brush strokes which keep on moving even when the painting is
-nished. After Mu-ch’i, perhaps the greatest master of the rough
brush was the Japanese monk Sesshu (1421–1506), whose
formidable technique included the most re-ned screens of pine
trees and birds, mountain landscapes reminiscent of Hsia-kuei, and
almost violently alive landscapes for which he used not only the
brush but fistfuls of inked straw to get the right texture of “,ying
hair lines.”
The Western eye is immediately struck by the absence of
symmetry in these paintings, by the consistent avoidance of regular
and geometrical shapes, whether straight or curved. For the
characteristic brush line is jagged, gnarled, irregularly twisting,
dashing, or sweeping–always spontaneous rather than predictable.
Even when the Zen monk or artist draws a solitary circle-one of the
most common themes of zenga–it is not only slightly eccentric and
out of shape, but the very texture of the line is full of life and verve
with the incidental splashes and gaps of the “rough brush.” For the
abstract or “perfect” circle becomes concrete and natural–a living
circle–and, in the same way, rocks and trees, clouds and waters
appear to the Chinese eye as most like themselves when most
unlike the intelligible forms of the geometer and architect.
Western science has made nature intelligible in terms of its
symmetries and regularities, analyzing its most wayward forms into
components of a regular and measurable shape. As a result we tend
to see nature and to deal with it as an “order” from which the
element of spontaneity has been “screened out.” But this order is
maya, and the “true suchness” of things has nothing in common
with the purely conceptual aridities of perfect squares, circles, or
triangles–except by spontaneous accident. Yet this is why the
Western mind is dismayed when ordered conceptions of the
universe break down, and when the basic behavior of the physical
world is found to be a “principle of uncertainty.” We -nd such a
world meaningless and inhuman, but familiarity with Chinese and
Japanese art forms might lead us to an altogether new appreciation
of this world in its living, and finally unavoidable, reality.
Mu-ch’i and Liang-k’ai did many paintings of the Zen Patriarchs
and masters, whom they represented for the most part as
abandoned lunatics, scowling, shouting, loafing around, or roaring
with laughter at drifting leaves. As favorite themes they adopted, as
Zen -gures, the two crazy hermits Han-shan and Shih-te, and the
enormously rotund folk-god Pu-tai, to complete a marvelous
assortment of happy tramps and rogues to exemplify the splendid
nonsense and emptiness of the Zen life. Zen and–to some extent–
Taoism seem to be the only spiritual traditions which feel secure
enough to lampoon themselves, or to feel sufficiently un-selfconscious to laugh not only about their religion but in the midst of
it. In these lunatic figures the Zen artists portray something slightly
more than a parody of their own wu-shin or “mindless” way of life,
for as “genius is to madness close allied” there is a suggestive
parallel between the meaningless babble of the happy lunatic and
the purposeless life of the Zen sage. In the words of a Zenrin poem:
The wild geese do not intend to cast their reflection;
The water has no mind to receive their image.
Thus the aimless life is the constant theme of Zen art of every
kind, expressing the artist’s own inner state of going nowhere in a
timeless moment. All men have these moments occasionally, and it
is just then that they catch those vivid glimpses of the world which
cast such a glow over the intervening wastes of memory–the smell
of burning leaves on a morning of autumn haze, a flight of sunlit
pigeons against a thundercloud, the sound of an unseen waterfall at
dusk, or the single cry of some unidentified bird in the depths of a
forest. In the art of Zen every landscape, every sketch of bamboo in
the wind or of lonely rocks, is an echo of such moments.
Where the mood of the moment is solitary and quiet it is called
sabi. When the artist is feeling depressed or sad, and in this
peculiar emptiness of feeling catches a glimpse of something rather
ordinary and unpretentious in its incredible “suchness,” the mood is
called wabi. When the moment evokes a more intense, nostalgic
sadness, connected with autumn and the vanishing away of the
world, it is called aware. And when the vision is the sudden
perception of something mysterious and strange, hinting at an
unknown never to be discovered, the mood is called yugen.f These
extremely untranslatable Japanese words denote the four basic
moods of furyu, that is, of the general atmosphere of Zen “taste” in
its perception of the aimless moments of life.
Inspired by the Sung masters, the Japanese produced a whole
cluster of superb sumi painters whose work ranks today among the
most prized treasures of the nation’s art–Muso Kokushi (1275–
1351), Cho Densu (d. 1431), Shubun (1414–1465), Soga Jasoku (d.
1483), Sesshu (1421–1506), Miyamoto Musashi (1582–1645), and
many others. Notable paintings were also made by the great Zen
monks Hakuin and Sengai (1750–1837), the latter showing a flair
for abstract painting so startlingly suggestive of the twentieth
century that it is easy to understand the interest of so many
contemporary painters in Zen.
Toward the beginning of the seventeenth century, Japanese artists
developed a still more suggestive and “offhand” style of sumi-e
called haiga as an illustrative accompaniment to haiku poems.
These were derived from zenga, the informal paintings of the Zen
monks accompanying verses from the Zenrin Kushu and sayings
from the various mondo and the sutras. Zenga and haiga represent
the most “extreme” form of sumi painting–the most spontaneous,
artless, and rough, replete with all those “controlled accidents” of
the brush in which they exemplify the marvelous meaninglessness
of nature itself.
From the earliest times the Zen masters had shown a partiality
for short, gnomic poems–at once laconic and direct like their
answers to questions about Buddhism. Many of these, like those we
have quoted from the Zenrin Kushu, contained overt references to
Zen and its principles. However, just as Tung-shan’s “Three pounds
of flax!” was an answer full of Zen but not about Zen, so the most
expressive Zen poetry is that which “says nothing,” which, in other
words, is not philosophy or commentary about life. A monk asked
Feng-hsüeh, “When speech and silence are both inadmissible, how
can one pass without error?” The master replied:
I always remember Kiangsu in March–
The cry of the partridge, the mass of fragrant flowers!
Here again, as in painting, is the expression of a live moment in its
pure “suchness”–though it is a pity to have to say so–and the
masters frequently quoted classical Chinese poetry in this way,
using couplets or quatrains which pointed, and said no more.
The practice of taking couplets from the old Chinese poems for
use as songs was also favored in literary circles, and at the
beginning of the eleventh century Fujiwara Kinto compiled an
anthology of such excerpts, together with short Japanese waka
poems, under the title Roeishu, the Collection of Clear Songs. Such
a use of poetry obviously expresses the same type of artistic vision
as we find in the paintings of Ma-yüan and Mu-ch’i, the same use of
empty space brought to life with a few strokes of the brush. In
poetry the empty space is the surrounding silence which a two-line
poem requires–a silence of the mind in which one does not “think
about” the poem but actually feels the sensation which it evokes–all
the more strongly for having said so little.
By the seventeenth century the Japanese had brought this
“wordless” poetry to perfection in the haiku, the poem of just
seventeen syllables which drops the subject almost as it takes it up.
To non-Japanese people haiku are apt to seem no more than
beginnings or even titles for poems, and in translation it is
impossible to convey the effect of their sound and rhythm.
However, translation can usually convey the image–and this is the
important point. Of course there are many haiku which seem as
stilted as the Japanese paintings on cheap lacquer trays for export.
But the non-Japanese listener must remember that a good haiku is
a pebble thrown into the pool of the listener’s mind, evoking
associations out of the richness of his own memory. It invites the
listener to participate instead of leaving him dumb with admiration
while the poet shows off.
The development of the haiku was largely the work of Basho
(1643–1694), whose feeling for Zen wanted to express itself in a
type of poetry altogether in the spirit of wu-shih–“nothing special.”
“To write haiku,” he said, “get a three-foot child”–for Basho’s
poems have the same inspired objectivity as a child’s expression of
wonder, and return us to that same feeling of the world as when it
first met our astonished eyes.
Kimi hi take
 Yoki mono misera
 Yukimaroge!
You light the fire;
 I’ll show you something nice,–
 A great ball of snow!3
Basho wrote his haiku in the simplest type of Japanese speech,
naturally avoiding literary and “highbrow” language, so creating a
style which made it possible for ordinary people to be poets.
Bankei, his contemporary, did just the same thing for Zen, for as
one of Ikkyu’s doka poems says:
Whatever runs counter
To the mind and will of ordinary people
Hinders the Law of Men
And the Law of Buddha.
This is in the spirit of Nan-ch’üan’s saying, “The ordinary mind is
the Tao”–where “ordinary” means “simply human” rather than
“merely vulgar.” It was thus that the seventeenth century saw an
extraordinary popularization of the Zen atmosphere in Japan,
reaching down from the monks and samurai to farmers and artisans.
The true feeling of haiku is “given away” in one of Basho’s
poems which, however, says just too much to be true haiku:
How admirable,
 He who thinks not, “Life is fleeting,”
 When he sees the lightning!
For the haiku sees things in their “suchness,” without comment–a
view of the world which the Japanese call sono-mama, “Just as it
is,” or “Just so.”
Weeds in the rice-field,
 Cut and left lying just so–
 Fertilizer!
In Zen a man has no mind apart from what he knows and sees, and
this is almost expressed by Gochiku in the haiku:
The long night;
 The sound of the water
 Says what I think.
And still more directly–
The stars on the pond;
 Again the winter shower
 Ruffles the water.
Haiku and waka poems convey perhaps more easily than
painting the subtle differences between the four moods of sabi,
wabi, aware, and yugen. The quiet, thrilling loneliness of sabi is
obvious in
On a withered branch
 A crow is perched,
 In the autumn evening.
But it is less obvious and therefore deeper in
With the evening breeze,
 The water laps against
 The heron’s legs.
In the dark forest
 A berry drops:
 The sound of the water.
Sabi is, however, loneliness in the sense of Buddhist detachment, of
seeing all things as happening “by themselves” in miraculous
spontaneity. With this goes that sense of deep, illimitable quietude
which descends with a long fall of snow, swallowing all sounds in
layer upon layer of softness.
Sleet falling;
 Fathomless, infinite
 Loneliness.
Wabi, the unexpected recognition of the faithful “suchness” of
very ordinary things, especially when the gloom of the future has
momentarily checked our ambitiousness, is perhaps the mood of
A brushwood gate,
 And for a lock–
 This snail.
The woodpecker
 Keeps on in the same place:
 Day is closing.
Winter desolation;
 In the rain-water tub,
 Sparrows are walking.
Aware is not quite grief, and not quite nostalgia in the usual
sense of longing for the return of a beloved past. Aware is the echo
of what has passed and of what was loved, giving them a resonance
such as a great cathedral gives to a choir, so that they would be the
poorer without it.
No one lives at the Barrier of Fuha;
 The wooden penthouse is fallen away;
All that remains
 Is the autumn wind.
The evening haze;
 Thinking of past things,
 How far-off they are!
Aware is the moment of crisis between seeing the transience of the
world with sorrow and regret, and seeing it as the very form of the
Great Void.
The stream hides itself
 In the grasses
 Of departing autumn.
Leaves falling,
 Lie on one another;
 The rain beats on the rain.
That moment of transition is just about to “cross over” in the haiku
written by Issa upon the death of his child:
This dewdrop world–
 It may be a dewdrop,
 And yet–and yet–
Since yugen signi-es a kind of mystery, it is the most baPing of
all to describe, and the poems must speak for themselves.
The sea darkens;
 The voices of the wild ducks
 Are faintly white.
The skylark:
 Its voice alone fell,
 Leaving nothing behind.
In the dense mist,
 What is being shouted
 Between hill and boat?
A trout leaps;
 Clouds are moving
 In the bed of the stream.
Or an example of yugen in the Zenrin poems:
Wind subsiding, the flowers still fall;
Bird crying, the mountain silence deepens.
Because Zen training had involved a constant use of these Chinese
couplets since at least the end of the fifteenth century, the
emergence of haiku is hardly surprising. The influence is selfevident in this “yugen-in-reverse” haiku by Moritake. The Zenrin
says:
The shattered mirror will reflect no more;
The fallen flower will hardly rise to the branch.
And Moritake–
A fallen flower
 Returning to the branch?
 It was a butterfly.
The association of Zen with poetry must inevitably bring up the
name of the Soto Zen monk and hermit Ryokan (1758–1831). So
often one thinks of the saint as a man whose sincerity provokes the
enmity of the world, but Ryokan holds the distinction of being the
saint whom everyone loved–perhaps because he was natural, again
as a child, rather than good. It is easy to form the impression that
the Japanese love of nature is predominantly sentimental, dwelling
on those aspects of nature which are “nice” and “pretty”–butterflies,
cherry blossoms, the autumn moon, chrysanthemums, and old pine
trees. But Ryokan is also the poet of lice, fleas, and being utterly
soaked with cold rain.
On rainy days
 The monk Ryokan
 Feels sorry for himself.
And his view of “nature” is all of a piece:
The sound of the scouring
 Of the saucepan blends
 With the tree-frogs’ voices.
In some ways Ryokan is a Japanese St. Francis, though much less
obviously religious. He is a wandering fool, un-self-consciously
playing games with children, living in a lonely hut in the forest
where the roof leaks and the wall is hung with poems in his
marvelously illegible, spidery handwriting, so prized by Japanese
calligraphers. He thinks of the lice on his chest as insects in the
grass, and expresses the most natural human feelings–sadness,
loneliness, bewilderment, or pity–without a trace of shame or
pride. Even when robbed he is still rich, for
The thief
 Left it behind–
 The moon at the window.
And when there is no money,
The wind brings
 Fallen leaves enough
 To make a fire.
When life is empty, with respect to the past, and aimless, with
respect to the future, the vacuum is filled by the present–normally
reduced to a hairline, a split second in which there is no time for
anything to happen. The sense of an in-nitely expanded present is
nowhere stronger than in cha-no-yu, the art of tea. Strictly, the term
means something like “Tea with hot water,” and through this one
art Zen has exercised an incalculable in,uence on Japanese life,
since the chajin, or “man of tea,” is an arbiter of taste in the many
subsidiary arts which cha-no-yu involves–architecture, gardening,
ceramics, metalwork, lacquer, and the arrangement of flowers
(ikebana).
Since cha-no-yu has become a conventional accomplishment for
young ladies, it has been made the subject of a great deal of
sentimental nonsense–associated with brocaded young dolls in
moonlit rooms, nervously trying to imitate the most stilted feelings
about porcelain and cherry blossom. But in the austere purity of,
say, the Soshu Sen School the art of tea is a genuine expression of
Zen which requires, if necessary, no further apparatus than a bowl,
tea, and hot water. If there is not even that, chado–“the way of tea”–
can be practiced anywhere and with anything, since it is really the
same as Zen.
If Christianity is wine and Islam coffee, Buddhism is most
certainly tea. Its quietening, clarifying, and slightly bitter taste gives
it almost the same taste as awakening itself, though the bitterness
corresponds to the pleasing roughness of “natural texture,” and the
“middle path” between sweet and sour. Long before the
development of cha-no-yu, tea was used by Zen monks as a
stimulant for meditation, and in this context it was drunk in a mood
of unhurried awareness which naturally lent itself to a ritualistic
type of action. In summer it refreshed and in winter warmed those
wandering hermit-monks who liked to build grass and bamboo huts
in the mountain forests, or by rock-filled streams in the gorges. The
totally undistracting emptiness and simplicity of the Taoist or Zen
hermitage has set the style not only for the special type of house for
cha-no-yu but for Japanese domestic architecture as a whole.6
Bodhidharma. By Hakuin Zenji (1683-1768) Yamamoto Collection. Photo courtesy of
Oak land Art Museum.
Two views of the rock and sand garden at Ryoanji, Kyoto.

Bodhidharma and Hui-k’e. By Sesshu (1420-1506).
Haboku Landscape. By Sesshu (1420-1506). Tokyo Museum.
The monastic “tea ceremony” was introduced into Japan by Eisai,
and though its form is different from the present cha-no-yu, it was
nonetheless its origin, and appears to have been adopted for lay use
during the -fteenth century. From this the cha-no-yu proper was
perfected by Sen-no-Rikyu (1518–1591), and from him descend the
three main schools of tea now flourishing. Ceremonial tea is not the
ordinary leaf tea which is steeped in hot water; it is finely
powdered green tea, mixed with hot water by means of a bamboo
whisk until it becomes what a Chinese writer called “the froth of
the liquid jade.” Cha-no-yu is most appreciated when confined to a
small group, or just two companions, and was especially loved by
the old-time samurai–as today by harassed businessmen–as a frank
escape from the turmoil of the world
Ideally, the house for cha-no-yu is a small hut set apart from the
main dwelling in its own garden. The hut is floored with tatami, or
straw mats, enclosing a fire-pit; the roof is usually thatched with
rice straw; and the walls, as in all Japanese homes, are paper shoji
supported by uprights of wood with a natural finish. One side of
the room is occupied by an alcove, or toko-noma, the position for a
single hanging scroll of painting or calligraphy, together with a
rock, a spray of flowers, or some other object of art.
The atmosphere, though formal, is strangely relaxed, and the
guests feel free to talk or watch in silence as they wish. The host
takes his time to prepare a charcoal fire, and with a bamboo dipper
pours water into a squat kettle of soft brown iron. In the same
formal but completely unhurried manner, he brings in the other
utensils–a plate with a few cakes, the tea bowl and caddy, the
whisk, and a larger bowl for leavings. During these preparations a
casual conversation continues, and soon the water in the kettle
begins to simmer and sigh, so that the guests fall silent to listen.
After a while, the host serves tea to the guests one by one from the
same bowl, taking it from the caddy with a strip of bamboo bent
into a spoon, pouring water from the kettle with the long-handled
dipper, whipping it into a froth with the whisk, and laying the
bowl before the first guest with its most interesting side towards
him.
The bowls used for cha-no-yu are normally dull-colored and
roughly finished, often unglazed at the base, and on the sides the
glaze has usually been allowed to run–an original fortunate mistake
which has been seen to offer endless opportunities for the
“controlled accident.” Specially favored are Korean rice bowls of
the cheapest quality, a peasant ware of crude texture from which
the tea masters have selected unintentional masterpieces of form.
The tea caddy is often of tarnished silver or infinitely deep black
lacquer, though sometimes old pottery medicine jars are used–
purely functional articles which were again picked out by the
masters for their unaffected beauty. A celebrated caddy once
smashed to pieces was mended with gold cement, and became the
much more treasured for the haphazard network of thin gold lines
which then covered its surface. After the tea has been drunk, the
guests may ask to inspect all the utensils which have been used,
since every one of them has been made or chosen with the utmost
care, and often brought out for the occasion because of some feature
that would particularly appeal to one of the guests.
Every appurtenance of the cha-no-yu has been selected in
accordance with canons of taste over which the most sensitive men
in Japan have brooded for centuries. Though the choice is usually
intuitive, careful measurement of the objects reveals interesting and
unexpected proportions–works of spontaneous geometry as
remarkable as the spiral shell of the nautilus or the structure of the
snow crystal. Architects, painters, gardeners, and craftsmen of all
kinds have worked in consultation with the cha-no-yu masters, like
an orchestra with its conductor, so that their “Zen taste” has passed
on into the objects made by the same craftsmen for everyday use.
This applies most particularly to ordinary, functional things–kitchen
implements, shoji paper, soup bowls, common teapots and cups,
,oor mats, baskets, utilitarian bottles and jars, textiles for everyday
clothing, and a hundred other simple artifacts in which the
Japanese show their good taste to best advantage.
The “Zen” of the cha-no-yu comes out all the more for the purely
secular character of the ritual, which has no liturgical character like
the Catholic Mass or the elaborate ceremonies of Shingon
Buddhism. Though the guests avoid political, financial, or business
matters in their conversation, there is sometimes non-argumentative
discussion of philosophical matters, though the preferred topics are
artistic and natural. It must be remembered that Japanese people
take to such subjects as readily and un-self-consciously as we talk of
sports or travel, and that their discussion of natural beauty is not the
affectation it might be in our own culture. Furthermore, they do not
feel in the least guilty about this admitted “escape” from the socalled “realities” of business and worldly competition. Escape from
these concerns is as natural and necessary as sleep, and they feel
neither compunction nor awkwardness in belonging for a while to
the Taoist world of carefree hermits, wandering through the
mountains like wind-blown clouds, with nothing to do but cultivate
a row of vegetables, gaze at the drifting mist, and listen to the
waterfalls. A few, perhaps, find the secret of bringing the two
worlds together, of seeing the “hard realities” of human life to be
the same aimless working of the Tao as the patterns of branches
against the sky. In the words of Hung Tzu-ch’eng:
If the mind is not overlaid with wind and waves, you will always
be living among blue mountains and green trees. If your true
nature has the creative force of Nature itself, wherever you may
go, you will see fishes leaping and geese flying.
The style of garden which goes with Zen and cha-no-yu is not, of
course, one of those ornate imitation landscapes with bronze cranes
and miniature pagodas. The intention of the best Japanese gardens
is not to make a realistic illusion of landscape, but simply to
suggest the general atmosphere of “mountain and water” in a small
space, so arranging the design of the garden that it seems to have
been helped rather than governed by the hand of man. The Zen
gardener has no mind to impose his own intention upon natural
forms, but is careful rather to follow the “intentionless intention” of
the forms themselves, even though this involves the utmost care and
skill. In fact the gardener never ceases to prune, clip, weed, and
train his plants, but he does so in the spirit of being part of the
garden himself rather than a directing agent standing outside. He is
not interfering with nature because he is nature, and he cultivates as
if not cultivating. Thus the garden is at once highly artificial and
extremely natural!
This spirit is seen at its best in the great sand and rock gardens of
Kyoto, of which the most famous example is the garden of Ryoanji.
It consists of five groups of rocks laid upon a rectangle of raked
sand, backed by a low stone wall, and surrounded by trees. It
suggests a wild beach, or perhaps a seascape with rocky islands, but
its unbelievable simplicity evokes a serenity and clarity of feeling so
powerful that it can be caught even from a photograph. The major
art which contributes to such gardens is bonseki, which may well be
called the “growing” of rocks. It requires diffcult expeditions to the
seashore, to mountains and rivers, in search of rock forms which
wind and water have shaped into asymmetrical, living contours.
These are carted to the garden site, and placed so as to look as if
they had grown where they stand, so as to be related to the
surrounding space or to the area of sand in the same way as -gure
to background in Sung paintings. Because the rock must look as if it
had always been in the same position, it must have the air of mosscovered antiquity, and, rather than try to plant moss on the rock,
the rock is first set for some years in a place where the moss will
grow by itself, and thereafter is moved to its final position. Rocks
picked out by the sensitive eye of the bonseki artist are ranked
among Japan’s most precious national treasures, but, except to
move them, they are untouched by the human hand.
The Zen monks liked also to cultivate gardens which took
advantage of an existing natural setting–to arrange rocks and plants
along the edges of a stream, creating a more informal atmosphere
suggesting a mountain canyon adjoining the monastery buildings.
They were always sparing and reserved in their use of color, as
were the Sung painters before them, since masses of ,owers in
sharply varying colors are seldom found in the state of nature.
Though not symmetrical, the Japanese garden has a clearly
perceptible form; unlike so many English and American ,ower
gardens, they do not resemble a daub in oil colors, and this delight
in the form of plants carries over into the art of flower arrangement
inside the house, accentuating the shapes of single sprays and leaves
rather than bunched colors.
Every one of the arts which have been discussed involves a
technical training which follows the same essential principles as
training in Zen. The best account of this training thus far available
in a Western language is Eugen Herrigel’s Zen in the Art of Archery,
which is the author’s story of his own experience under a master of
the Japanese bow. To this should be added the already mentioned
letter on Zen and swordsmanship (kendo) by the seventeenthcentury master Takuan, translated by Suzuki in his Zen Buddhism
and Its Influence on Japanese Culture.
The major problem of each of these disciplines is to bring the
student to the point from which he can really begin. Herrigel spent
almost five years trying to -nd the right way of releasing the
bowstring, for it had to be done “unintentionally,” in the same way
as a ripe fruit bursts its skin. His problem was to resolve the
paradox of practicing relentlessly without ever “trying,” and to let
go of the taut string intentionally without intention. His master at
one and the same time urged him to keep on working and working,
but also to stop making an effort. For the art cannot be learned
unless the arrow “shoots itself,” unless the string is released wu-hsin
and wu-nien, without “mind” and without blocking, or “choice.”
After all those years of practice there came a day when it just
happened–how, or why, Herrigel never understood.
The same is true in learning to use the brush for writing or
painting. The brush must draw by itself. This cannot happen if one
does not practice constantly. But neither can it happen if one makes
an effort. Similarly, in swordsmanship one must not first decide
upon a certain thrust and then attempt to make it, since by that
time it will be too late. Decision and action must be simultaneous.
This was the point of Dogen’s image of firewood and ashes, for to
say that firewood does not “become” ashes is to say that it has no
intention to be ash before it is actually ash–and then it is no longer
firewood. Dogen insisted that the two states were “clearly cut,” and
in the same way Herrigel’s master did not want him to “mix” the
two states of stretching and releasing the bow. He instructed him to
draw it to the point of fullest tension and stop there without any
purpose, any intention in mind as to what to do next. Likewise, in
Dogen’s view of za-zen one must be sitting “just to sit” and there
must not be any intention to have satori.
The sudden visions of nature which form the substance of haiku
arise in the same way, for they are never there when one looks for
them. The artificial haiku always feels like a piece of life which has
been deliberately broken off or wrenched away from the universe,
whereas the genuine haiku has dropped off all by itself, and has the
whole universe inside it.
Artists and craftsmen of the Far East have, indeed, measured,
analyzed, and classi-ed the techniques of the masters to such a
degree that by deliberate imitation they can come close to
“deceiving, if it were possible, even the elect.” By all quantitative
standards the work so contrived is indistinguishable from its
models, just as bowmen and swordsmen trained by quite other
methods can equal the feats of Zen-inspired samurai. But, so far as
Zen is concerned, the end results have nothing to do with it. For, as
we have seen all along, Zen has no goal; it is a traveling without
point, with nowhere to go. To travel is to be alive, but to get
somewhere is to be dead, for as our own proverb says, “To travel
well is better than to arrive.”
A world which increasingly consists of destinations without
journeys between them, a world which values only “getting
somewhere” as fast as possible, becomes a world without substance.
One can get anywhere and everywhere, and yet the more this is
possible, the less is anywhere and everywhere worth getting to. For
points of arrival are too abstract, too Euclidean to be enjoyed, and
it is all very much like eating the precise ends of a banana without
getting what lies in between. The point, therefore, of these arts is
the doing of them rather than the accomplishments. But, more than
this, the real joy of them lies in what turns up unintentionally in
the course of practice, just as the joy of travel is not nearly so much
in getting where one wants to go as in the unsought surprises which
occur on the journey.
Planned surprises are as much of a contradiction as intentional
satori, and whoever aims at satori is after all like a person who
sends himself Christmas presents for fear that others will forget him.
One must simply face the fact that Zen is all that side of life which
is completely beyond our control, and which will not come to us by
any amount of forcing or wangling or cunning–stratagems which
produce only fakes of the real thing. But the last word of Zen is not
an absolute dualism–the rather barren world of controlled action on
the one side, and the spontaneous world of uncontrolled surprise
on the other. For who controls the controller?
Because Zen does not involve an ultimate dualism between the
controller and the controlled, the mind and the body, the spiritual
and the material, there is always a certain “physiological” aspect to
its techniques. Whether Zen is practiced through za-zen or cha-no-yu
or kendo, great importance is attached to the way of breathing. Not
only is breathing one of the two fundamental rhythms of the body;
it is also the process in which control and spontaneity, voluntary
and involuntary action, find their most obvious identity. Long
before the origins of the Zen School, both Indian yoga and Chinese
Taoism practiced “watching the breath,” with a view to letting–not
forcing-it to become as slow and silent as possible. Physiologically
and psychologically, the relationship between breathing and
“insight” is not yet altogether clear. But if we look at man as
process rather than entity, rhythm rather than structure, it is obvious
that breathing is something which he does–and thus is–constantly.
Therefore grasping air with the lungs goes hand-in-hand with
grasping at life.
So-called “normal” breathing is fitful and anxious. The air is
always being held and not fully released, for the individual seems
incapable of “letting” it run its full course through the lungs. He
breathes compulsively rather than freely. The technique therefore
begins by encouraging a full release of the breath–easing it out as if
the body were being emptied of air by a great leaden ball sinking
through the chest and abdomen, and settling down into the ground.
The returning in-breath is then allowed to follow as a simple re,ex
action. The air is not actively inhaled; it is just allowed to come–
and then, when the lungs are comfortably -lled, it is allowed to go
out once more, the image of the leaden ball giving it the sense of
“falling” out as distinct from being pushed out.
One might go as far as to say that this way of breathing is Zen
itself in its physiological aspect. Yet, as with every other aspect of
Zen, it is hindered by striving for it, and for this reason beginners in
the breathing technique often develop the peculiar anxiety of
feeling unable to breathe unless keeping up a conscious control. But
just as there is no need to try to be in accord with the Tao, to try to
see, or to try to hear, so it must be remembered that the breath will
always take care of itself. This is not a breathing “exercise” so much
as a “watching and letting” of the breath, and it is always a serious
mistake to undertake it in the spirit of a compulsive discipline to
be “practiced” with a goal in mind.
This way of breathing is not for special times alone. Like Zen
itself, it is for all circumstances whatsoever, and in this way, as in
others, every human activity can become a form of za-zen. The
application of Zen in activity is not restricted to the formal arts,
and, on the other hand, does not absolutely require the specific
“sitting technique” of za-zen proper. The late Dr. Kunihiko Hashida,
a lifelong student of Zen and editor of the works of Dogen, never
used formal za-zen. But his “Zen practice” was precisely his study of
physics, and to suggest his attitude he used to say that his lifework
was “to science” rather than “to study science.”
In its own way, each one of the arts which Zen has inspired gives
vivid expression to the sudden or instantaneous quality of its view
of the world. The momentariness of sumi paintings and haiku, and
the total presence of mind required in cha-no-yu and kendo, bring
out the real reason why Zen has always called itself the way of
instantaneous awakening. It is not just that satori comes quickly and
unexpectedly, all of a sudden, for mere speed has nothing to do
with it. The reason is that Zen is a liberation from time. For if we
open our eyes and see clearly, it becomes obvious that there is no
other time than this instant, and that the past and the future are
abstractions without any concrete reality.
Until this has become clear, it seems that our life is all past and
future, and that the present is nothing more than the in-nitesimal
hairline which divides them. From this comes the sensation of
“having no time,” of a world which hurries by so rapidly that it is
gone before we can enjoy it. But through “awakening to the instant”
one sees that this is the reverse of the truth: it is rather the past and
future which are the fleeting illusions, and the present which is
eternally real. We discover that the linear succession of time is a
convention of our single-track verbal thinking, of a consciousness
which interprets the world by grasping little pieces of it, calling
them things and events. But every such grasp of the mind excludes
the rest of the world, so that this type of consciousness can get an
approximate vision of the whole only through a series of grasps,
one after another. Yet the super-ciality of this consciousness is seen
in the fact that it cannot and does not regulate even the human
organism. For if it had to control the heartbeat, the breath, the
operation of the nerves, glands, muscles, and sense organs, it would
be rushing wildly around the body taking care of one thing after
another, with no time to do anything else. Happily, it is not in
charge, and the organism is regulated by the timeless “original
mind,” which deals with life in its totality and so can do ever so
many “things” at once.
However, it is not as if the superficial consciousness were one
thing, and the “original mind” another, for the former is a
specialized activity of the latter. Thus the superficial consciousness
can awaken to the eternal present if it stops grasping. But this does
not come to pass by trying to concentrate on the present–an effort
which succeeds only in making the moment seem ever more elusive
and fleeting, ever more impossible to bring into focus. Awareness of
the “eternal now” comes about by the same principle as the clarity
of hearing and seeing and the proper freedom of the breath. Clear
sight has nothing to do with trying to see; it is just the realization
that the eyes will take in every detail all by themselves, for so long
as they are open one can hardly prevent the light from reaching
them. In the same way, there is no diffculty in being fully aware of
the eternal present as soon as it is seen that one cannot possibly be
aware of anything else–that in concrete fact there is no past or
future. Making an effort to concentrate on the instantaneous
moment implies at once that there are other moments. But they are
nowhere to be found, and in truth one rests as easily in the eternal
present as the eyes and ears respond to light and sound.
Now this eternal present is the “timeless,” unhurried flowing of
the Tao–
Such a tide as, moving, seems to sleep,
Too full for sound or foam.
As Nan-ch’üan said, to try to accord with it is to deviate from it,
though in fact one cannot deviate and there is no one to deviate. So,
too, one cannot get away from the eternal present by trying to
attend to it, and this very fact shows that, apart from this present,
there is no distinct self that watches and knows it-which is why Huik’o could not find his mind when Bodhidharma asked him to
produce it. However puzzling this may be, and however many
philosophical problems it may raise, one clear look is enough to
show its unavoidable truth. There is only this now. It does not come
from anywhere; it is not going anywhere. It is not permanent, but it
is not impermanent. Though moving, it is always still. When we try
to catch it, it seems to run away, and yet it is always here and there
is no escape from it. And when we turn round to find the self which
knows this moment, we find that it has vanished like the past.
Therefore the Sixth Patriarch says in the T’an-ching:
In this moment there is nothing which comes to be. In this
moment there is nothing which ceases to be. Thus there is no
birth-and-death to be brought to an end. Wherefore the absolute
tranquillity (of nirvana) is this present moment. Though it is at
this moment, there is no limit to this moment, and herein is
eternal delight. (7)
Yet, when it comes to it, this moment can be called “present”
only in relation to past and future, or to someone to whom it is
present. But when there is neither past nor future, and no one to
whom this moment is present, what is it? When Fa-ch’ang was
dying, a squirrel screeched on the roof. “It’s just this,” he said, “and
nothing else.”
1 Cheng-tao Ke, 24.
2 Wu-men Kuan, 24.
3 This and all the following translations of haiku are the work of R. H. Blyth, and come
for the most part from his superb work, the four-volume Haiku, which is without any
question the best treatment of the subject in English. Blyth has the additional advantage
of some experience in Zen training, and as a result his grasp of Chinese and Japanese
literature is unusually perceptive. See Blyth (2) in the Bibliography.
4 R. H. Blyth in “Ikkyu’s Doka,” The Young East, vol. 2, no. 7. (Tokyo, 1953.)
5 An impression especially sickening to the poetic mood of the middle twentieth
century. It comes, however, from a level of haiku and other art forms which
corresponds to our own greeting-card verse and confectionery-box art. But consider the
almost surrealistic imagery of the following from the Zenrin:
On Mount Wu-t’ai the clouds are steaming rice;
Before the ancient Buddha hall, dogs piss at heaven.
And there are many haiku such as this from Issa:
The mouth
 That cracked a flea
 Said, “Namu Amida Butsu!”
6 An in,uence combined with a native style which can still be seen at the ancient
Shinto shrine of Ise–a style which strongly suggests the cultures of the southern Paci-c
islands.
7 Since it is frequently my pleasure to be invited for cha-no-yu by Sabro Hasegawa, who
has a remarkable intuition for issuing these invitations at the most hectic moments, I
can testify that I know no better form of psychotherapy.
8 Ts’ai-ken T’an, 291. Hung’s book of “vegetable-root talk” is a collection of wandering
observations by a sixteenth-century poet whose philosophy was a blend of Taoism, Zen,
and Confucianism.